 [Music]
 Welcome to Thoughtful Money. I'm Thoughtful Money founder and your host, Adam Taggart,
 and I'm very excited to be welcoming you back here at the end of the week for another, for
 me, but the first ever for this channel, Weekly Market Recap, featuring my great and steadfast
 friend, Lance Roberts, portfolio manager from Real Investment Advice. Lance, how are you
 doing, buddy?
 I'm doing great. Glad to be back after a three week hiatus. It's nice.
 It's been a while and it felt like a long time, but a lot has happened. A lot has happened
 in that time, but I got to say, this is always the favorite part of my week and not being
 able to do it over the past couple of weeks really just felt like this itch I had that
 I just couldn't scratch and what made it worse was an itch that I think a lot of people wanted
 scratch because I don't think five minutes ever went by in that three week period where
 I wasn't getting hammered with emails from people saying, "Where's Lance? When are you
 and Lance going to pick this back up? Are you and Lance going to pick? Has Lance killed
 you?"
 No, it's interesting. I got just tons of emails and Twitter comments saying the same thing.
 It's like, "Hey, are you going to go back? I watch you every Saturday with Adam. It's
 my whole week. I wait for that." One thing I was like, "Man, if you're just watching
 me once a week, you're missing all the good stuff." We do a daily radio podcast, daily
 blogs, newsletters all on our website. It was like, "I had no idea there is all these
 tools out there for me to use." It actually kind of worked out well because we got to
 introduce people to a whole new suite of products as well.
 Good. Good. And make that plug, Lance. Make that way. It is well-deserved, well-earned,
 and I totally encourage everybody who has been watching us week after week to go check
 out your YouTube channel itself for all that intro week data. They can get their total
 Lance fix if they're not getting enough of it with just this weekly market recap.
 Which is probably too much, so there you go.
 You can never get too much, Lance. Look, folks, lots to catch up with here with Lance. We're
 going to jump into the market stuff in just a second. In addition to, "Hey, when are you
 and Lance going to start up these weekly recaps again?" I've been hit with a lot of questions
 about the birth of thoughtful money, the transition from Wealthion, what's going on, what are
 you have in store for us? So I've taken a number of the most common questions we've
 received and I've emailed them to Lance and he's going to ask me them in this conversation.
 We're going to do that in the back half, but just want to let you know that it's coming.
 All right, Lance. Well, look, let's dive right into the market data and I guess since it's
 been a while, let me give you a chance to take a victory lap of sorts on two fronts,
 the stocks and bonds. So last time we were having this conversation, the market had been
 grinding down. It was in the low, around 4,100 or so and there's a lot of people coming out
 and saying, "Okay, this is it. This is the big break. It's going to roll over from here,"
 and you were pointing to a lot of data, both technical and historical, that suggested that
 it was probably more likely that stocks were going to rally into the end of the year here
 and I know as generally tends to happen is when a trend starts getting going, more and
 more people were kind of just piling on you saying, "Lance, you've got no idea what you're
 talking about. You're being too pollyannish here," and lo and behold, now that we're talking
 here in this week, the market's back up to 4,500. We'll talk about where it's going from
 here but why don't I take a pause here on the stock side of things and just let you
 react to this. You're not going to say, "I told you so," but you're going to say, "Hey,
 folks, this is what I was thinking."
 Well, no, I want to do it a little differently. Let's just go back and talk because I actually,
 while you and I were not visiting, I've actually been talking a lot on my daily podcast as
 well. I've been writing some blogs about this as well, talking about narratives. Let's go
 back to October real quick and I know we got to get the way back time machine here to go
 all the way to last month. It's crazy though. It seems like when this stuff was going on,
 it was months ago, not three weeks ago, but three weeks ago, what were we talking about?
 We were talking about debts and deficits, that that was going to lead to this massive
 surge in interest rates. Interest rates in the tenured treasury at that point were nearing
 5%. The Fed was saying, "Hey, we're aggressively fighting inflation. We are focused on this
 inflation fight," and the belief was higher for longer. We were talking about energy prices
 going to $150 a barrel in the month of October because of the Israel-Hamas fight, right?
 So they were talking about the stock market. Stock market's just grinding lower because
 of all kind of pressure on the overall market. And as you said, the kind of bears coming
 out. And don't give kudos just to me, Sven Heinrich, who you were also interviewing at
 the time, was saying very much the same thing. Technically, the markets are so deeply oversold
 and so negative that you're going to get a bounce out of the markets. And that's kind
 of where we are.
 So now let's fast forward three weeks. Now, this has all happened, mind you, in three
 weeks. Oil prices have collapsed. We're below $80 a barrel. That's sparking fears of a recessionary
 type of economic environment, economic slowdown. So that's pushing yields lower. At the same
 time, the Fed has pretty much come out and, without saying it, has said we're done hiking
 rates. Tim Rose recently saying the same thing that in the December meeting that's coming
 up for the FOMC, I believe that's around the 15th of the month. Don't quote me on the date.
 But the next FOMC meeting, the challenge for the Fed is going to be how to recraft their
 meeting message into this "we're done for now" type scenario. So that's changed. So
 that now yields have dropped to around 4.5% on the 10-year Treasury. Stock prices subsequently
 have rallied sharply on better than expected. And again, here's the reasons we laid out
 for the rally at the end of October was deeply negative sentiment, deeply offside positioning
 by professional managers. CTAs, who are these computerized trading algorithms that were
 heavily shorting the market in October, we said, hey, that was going to have to reverse.
 And then, of course, stock buybacks, where that window was going to open at the beginning
 of November. So those have come roaring back into the market. CTAs have had to cover. And
 so we've had this very accelerated, very sharp bounce in the markets over the last three
 weeks. So, again, so now this narrative has all shifted. In three weeks, we went from
 this uber bearish sentiment to now everybody's like, oh, it's all good. Nothing-- we're on
 the slopes higher from here. Goldman Sachs next year is going to be fantastic. We're
 going to have this big growth in earnings for the S&P 500. Profit margins are going
 to grow again. It's going to be this economic soft landing scenario. Everything is perfect.
 Again, narratives. Be careful of these narratives because, again, the markets are responding
 to a very short-term set of catalysts. And once we get through these catalysts, which
 will end over the next month or so, we're going to have to come back and revisit the
 fundamentals, which are going to drive the markets next year. So the big message from
 the last couple of weeks is-- and as we said so many times, you and I have had this conversation.
 Be careful jumping on these narratives and saying, I'm going to put my whole portfolio
 into this either the end of the world scenario or the bulls to the moon scenario because
 markets don't work that way. And that will often get you on the wrong side of the trade.
 So I do want to talk in a bit about a recent piece you wrote called "Speculator, Investor,
 What's the Difference?" where you pick these sort of timeless words of wisdom from many
 of history's most famous investors. Because I think a lot of the element of what you're
 talking about there, you dive deeply into that article and there's a lot of real diamonds
 in there. But in general, Lance, I'm just curious, would you say more often than not,
 maybe even much more often than not, the headlines will mislead you if you're just reacting to
 what the headlines are sort of screaming?
 Yeah. Well, that was kind of the point of-- so I wrote a couple of articles in particular,
 and I'll see if I can-- what we're talking in a second when you take over, I'll see if
 I can find this one particular chart. But this is one thing that I've been real hammering
 on for the last couple of weeks is about these narrative issues, is that you've got to be
 super careful. And whether it's a YouTube channel or whether it's CNBC or MarketWatch,
 and trust me, I get people emailing me tons of stuff off YouTube and everything. They're
 like, "Hey, did you see what this guy said?" So I'll go watch these YouTube clips. And
 generally, these are people-- you've got to be really careful, right? So who's the person
 that's giving you this information? Does he manage money for a living? Does he actually
 have skin in the game, so to speak, into what he's doing? CNBC, MarketWatch, great. They're
 a great resource of information. But these people don't manage money. They're not in
 their day. They just write whatever it is. And here's the important thing about the media.
 Look, I've been doing radio for 23 years now. And the one thing that you learn doing media
 is the simple term. And it doesn't matter whether it's television, radio, YouTube, whatever
 it is. If it bleeds, it leads, right? So the more dire it is, the more clicks and views
 you're going to get. And so this is why, if you ever turn on the evening news, it's not,
 "Hey, look at little Jimmy. He won. He did this really great thing. He took his whole
 baseball team, and they went and raised money to help elderly people. Isn't it a great story?"
 That's not the first thing that's up. It's who died, who was in a car wreck, who shot
 who, who got robbed, because that's the stuff that gets you into watching. Then later on
 down the show, they'll tell you about little Jimmy and his heroic act that he did, right?
 But this is what gets us off base. We see these headlines. We assume that this is what's
 going on, and it's pervasive. It's everywhere. And naturally, as humans, we have a fight
 and flee type systemic response in our system. So when we see bad headlines of the economy,
 the markets, whatever it is, our immediate systemic response is to flee, right? I got
 to sell everything, get out of the market and do this, whatever it is. Conversely, when
 the markets are rallying like it is now, it's all good news, and so now I can't wait to
 get back in. And this is why people consistently sell low and buy high over time. That's how
 it works out. But that's why be so careful of these narratives. It's what gets you to
 view it. But then you've got to step back. I'll give you a really good one here as an
 example. Just read a Wall Street Journal article this morning. China selling treasuries at
 a record pace. And when you look at the data, it says, wow, the value of the bonds they
 held over the last two years has shrunk by about 40%. So they have sold a tremendous
 amount of their bonds. It is absolutely a false narrative and is absolutely wrong information.
 Let me explain to you why. If Treasury owns one, we're going to use a real simple example.
 China owns $1 trillion worth of treasuries. Now, over the next two years, right, they
 don't buy or sell anything. So now we're going back two years. So January 2022, they own
 a trillion dollars worth of treasuries. And up to this point, they have not bought or
 sold anything. What have interest rates done over the last two years? They've gone up.
 What is the value of bonds done the last two years? They've gone down by 40%. So when you
 look at their balance of holdings, they own $600 billion worth of bonds. Did they sell
 any bonds? No. The value of the bonds they hold fell. And so when you start looking at
 the data, they're not selling their bonds hand over fist. The value of the corpus that
 they own has fallen because of the rise in interest rates. Now, are they selling some
 treasuries? Yes, there's no doubt about that because why? They have an absolutely destroyed
 economic environment going on right now. They're going into recession and they're working to
 balance that peg ratio. We've talked about reserves. They're struggling to balance that
 peg ratio between China and US. Why? Because we're buying less stuff from them. So they
 have less money to keep in reserves because we're transacting less business with them.
 That's why their economy is slowing down as much as it is. So you've got to be very careful
 with these narratives. It's not that they're selling bonds because, "Oh, I just don't want
 to own US treasuries." That's not the case at all. In fact, if you take a look at who
 is buying bonds, individual investors are buying bonds as fast as they can hand over
 a fist because they're putting money into 5% money market funds and what do they buy?
 Free bonds. So you've got to keep all these narratives. It's a great headline, right?
 China's selling all of our treasuries, one of our big fears, right? So immediately we
 start panicking and making decisions. Dig down below the surface, look at the data and
 understand what's going on. That's the problem with narratives and that's why you've got
 to really dig into this stuff to understand what you're doing.
 All right, great point. And when we get to the bonds part of this discussion, I do want
 to talk briefly about the narrative of foreigners selling our bonds because it is happening
 and I didn't prepare this chart for this discussion, but I've definitely pulled up charts in past
 videos which show kind of the relative buyers of treasuries and foreign buyers, they're
 material but they're not like the biggest player by any stretch and the biggest player
 by a country mile historically has been the Fed who is not in the game right now and if
 we think that the Fed may be back in the game at some point, if it winds down QT and maybe
 some sort of breakage in the system forces them to return to QE, that could have a very
 big impact on the prospects for treasuries. So I want to put a pin in that and hopefully
 we get to that a little bit later on.
 Just real quick while you're on this, because I said when you took over the conversation,
 I wanted to find a chart real quick. And this is the whole point about narratives. So I
 wrote this article talking about narratives on our website and this was, let me share
 this one chart and I'll give it right back to you. So this chart is just basically a
 bell curve of probabilities and Adam, you understand standard deviations and how things
 occur now. Now this occurs in everything that you do, whether it's a stock, whether it's
 a bond, whether it's an economic event, whether it's your personal life, and as individuals,
 let's take a really bad scenario, right? So you get served with a lawsuit. And it's just
 a civil lawsuit, it's nothing major, right? Just maybe you ran a business and something
 didn't go right and so you get sued. Happens all the time in business. Well, immediately
 the first thing that we do is, "Oh my God, I'm getting sued. I'm going to go bankrupt
 if I lose," right? So that's not how most of these things work out though, because in
 civil suits, 90% of the time, these things wind up in arbitration. You come to some type
 of mutually agreement settlement. They don't get everything they want. You don't get everything
 you want, but it's a nominal event and you go on down with life and get it going on.
 But immediately our first reaction, again, we talked about the systemic issue of our
 psychology, is we immediately go to the worst possible outcome and we focus on that. It
 ruins our life for the next six months because we're involved in this thing. And that turns
 out not to be such a bad deal after all, right? Just as part of doing business and you move
 on. But this applies to everything. So if we talk about the economy, when you see a
 headline that says, "Oh my God, this is happening and it's going to destroy the economy. We're
 going to shut down the government. We're going to default on our debt. It's going to be World
 War III." Now I'm not saying that those aren't possibilities, right? And they certainly are
 possibilities, but when we put it onto a bell curve of normal event outcomes, those are
 what we call tails. And those are way out there on the end. And those are very, very
 small probability events. Even things like a financial crisis or a depression, they're
 certainly much more possible than complete economic meltdown, but they're still pretty
 far out there. I mean, there was a hundred years between the depression and the financial
 crisis. So those things do happen and we have to give them some credibility, but they're
 very far out there on the range of possibilities. And this is what we always talk about when
 managing your own money, focus on the possibilities, not the possibilities. And so if you're banking
 on these really, really outlier events like just demonstrably strong economic growth,
 that probably isn't going to happen in the economy or a financial crisis, that's probably
 not going to happen in the current environment. So where are we? 95% of the probability of
 what's going to happen over the next few years is going to be anything from a hard landing
 to normal economic growth, somewhere in between that. Most likely it's going to be a normal
 recession to a soft landing or no recession type scenario. That's going to be about 70%
 of your probability. Another 25% on both sides is the more dire outcomes. And then you get
 really far out there on the extremes. And so this is the whole thing that we're talking
 about with these narratives. It's not saying that these narratives can't happen, but we
 have to put them in the context of what the possibilities and probabilities actually are.
 This is a great point and a great chart for it, Lance. So when we talk about these very
 unlikely events, these low probability events, we tend to call them tail risks. And the reason
 we call them tail risks is because they're out there on those extreme ends, which are
 the tails of this bell curve. So this does a very good job of saying, yeah, if you're
 going to worry about financial crisis, that's okay, but it's got about a 2% chance of happening.
 So you shouldn't be putting 100% of your focus on that because as you're saying, the probabilities
 are much more likely to occur within the heart of the bell. And you and I have been in this
 business long enough, Lance, to have seen a lot of people very understandably see data,
 see developments and say, "Oh my gosh, this is it. I'm 100% sure that economic Armageddon
 is around the corner and they sell all their worldly possessions and they build the bunker
 or whatever." Or sometimes it happens on the other end. They go all into Tesla calls, or
 whatever, or GameStop calls. And they get crushed. And it's because they managed risk
 poorly.
 And to be honest, we need to start from the point of we're human animals. The behavioral
 economists have proven that evolutionarily, our brains are not good at sort of long-term
 risk assessment. We're very good at the fight or flight. Is there a snarling bear in front
 of us? Okay, great. We can make the right decision pretty quickly in that scenario.
 But if we're talking about what something complex like the economy and the financial
 markets might do over the next couple of quarters, it's just not a risk that we're very well
 wired for, at least not to make a snap decision on. That's where we need to build out our
 spreadsheets and really rely on data. So very useful. And I'll give you another example
 of this too. So I'll try to find this and bring it on a future one of these videos.
 It was a great graphic I saw, sort of like a little mini video clip. And it visualized
 your risk as the average American of dying of basically like all the different ways you
 could die. And the one that I spend the most time focused on in my real life is the lowest
 probability ever, which is shark attack. But that's just my personal phobia. I think about
 getting eaten by a shark way more than I should, and certainly way more than the probability
 of it happening.
 But then if you look at kind of what the media is telling us to worry about, these are things
 like terrorist risks and gun crime, all sorts of other things that get us divided. They're
 actually very low probability. And if we really just said, "Hey, look, what we really care
 about is preserving human life. And if that's the metric we're going to look at, well, Jesus,
 well, then we should just be focused on basically preventing heart disease and stopping traffic
 accidents." Because those are the things that kill the vast majority of people.
 But we don't because these other things are very emotionally triggering and stirring up
 for us. So we spend a ton of time focused on this stuff and spending gazillions of dollars
 taking our shoes off at TSA and all that stuff. And I'm not saying that security doesn't play
 an important role, but I think we totally over invest our capital, both like our time
 and focus capital, our human capital and our financial capital in a lot of things that
 if the goal is to protect the maximum amount of human lives, they're really pretty misdirected.
 So anyways, I'm really glad you brought this point up. All right. Well, look, just to kind
 of round out the equity part of the conversation. So you were right. In addition to you saying,
 "Hey, folks, definitely reserve some part of your probability assessment that markets
 might rebound here into the end of the year." We had folks like, well, Sven had definitely
 been saying that we had him on. Darius Dale had been saying it when we had him on. And
 I want to go back to his comments in a second. Tommy Thornton said the same thing. Tom McCullough,
 another TA guy said the same thing. In Darius's conversation that I had with him,
 he brought up a bunch of historical precedents and said, stocks tend to sort of do well right
 into recession. And the analogy that we came up with in the conversation was like the party
 gets most wild right before the cops show up. And I'm not necessarily saying that's
 exactly going to happen this time, but sort of two related questions for you. One is,
 how much more does this current rally have room to run? From your earlier comments, it
 almost sounds like you might be swinging from, "Hey, we were pretty oversold," to, "Oh gosh,
 maybe this thing's moved so far so fast. Maybe we need to start having a little bit of caution
 here." But we're going to get into the recession risk discussion in a little bit. But how concerned
 are you at this point in time that this is potentially sort of like a last and maybe
 false euphoria going on in stocks before something might happen next year?
 Well, again, that's too far out. You can't predict anything in the markets more than
 a couple of weeks at best. What we know right now going into the end of the year is that,
 stocks have rallied very sharply. And so this week we did tax loss selling. So we had some
 stocks that we liked a lot, but they have just not performed well. So we use this rally
 to do our tax loss selling for the year. We've been repositioning the portfolio, raise a
 little bit of cash on this rally. And what we've been saying over the last few weeks
 is, "Hey, this rally is going to come. And when it comes, use the rally to rebalance
 your portfolio risk." So things that aren't working, you get rid of those. Things that
 are working, you can add to some of those. But when we start getting fairly stressed
 here, take a little bit of profits, raise some cash. And so back in October, if you
 were just completely terrified about the market's like, "Oh my God, this is all ending." You
 had too much risk in your portfolio. So now, the problem is that at the market lows, everybody
 wants to sell anything. And now that market's rallying, now nobody wants to sell anything
 because they're worried about the market's keeping going up. So use this rally. We are
 overbought now, short term. Here, let me just go ahead and share our charts.
 Yeah. Yeah. I was going to ask you to do that. Let's look at the latest technicals and see
 where we are on those key bands.
 Yeah. So we've had this very, very nice rally here. We broke through all these moving averages,
 the 200, the 20, the 50. We broke above this downtrend channel that was very much intact
 going back to the July highs. And we've turned that MACD sell signal back into a very strong
 buy signal. But the relative strength index is now approaching pretty overbought levels.
 So this is a good time right now to go ahead and take some profits out of your portfolio
 and saying, "Okay, look, I've had a great recovery here. Let's step back for a moment
 and let's just kind of remeasure our portfolio. And then on a pullback, then I can buy some
 more stuff." Because things have really gotten ahead of themselves. Microsoft's very overbought.
 Apple's very overbought. Nvidia is very overbought here. So those stocks will give you a pullback.
 And when they do, then you can add those in or add to, if you own those positions, add
 to them or on a pullback, you can add them to your portfolio. And so the question is,
 why would we get a pullback? Well, first of all, markets are very overbought. So just
 systemically speaking, we had CTAs that were grossly underweight exposure. They were heavily
 short the market. And so they had to cover. And we've had the most buying in the market
 like on record. It's just been a massive flood of money that's come into the market over
 the last three weeks. So if you think about the way the markets work, it's a market, right?
 So you have buyers and you have sellers. And so if you have a lot of people willing to
 sell and you have just a very small number of buyers, prices are going to go down because
 everybody's trying to get out and there's nobody there to buy them. When everybody wants
 to buy stuff and sellers are going, OK, I'll sell to you, but you have to buy at a higher
 price. And so that's what drives prices up. Well, you eventually kind of run out of sellers
 because as the markets are getting more ebullient, people are now going, hey, I don't want to
 sell here because I'm thinking prices are going to keep going up. So this is going to
 start to cause the markets to pause as we start kind of running out of buyers. Buyers
 have bought what they wanted to buy. And now we're going to start having more sellers coming
 into the markets and there's not going to be as many buyers. This is why over the last
 couple of days, markets have really kind of started to struggle here a bit. Not really
 going up, not really going down. But there's kind of an even match right now with buyers
 and sellers. So prices aren't really moving very much. This could go on for another week
 or so. And if the markets just consolidate sideways, this overbought condition will get
 reduced. If the markets decline, which I kind of suspect they will, I'll tell you why I
 think they're going to decline here in the next couple of weeks, is that we get a bit
 of a sell off, maybe back towards this kind of 50 day moving average, this downtrend line,
 somewhere back in here, just kind of just close this gap a little bit. Then that's going
 to give you a really good opportunity to step in and buy some stuff where the market's oversold,
 buy some stuff at cheaper prices. So if you want to buy whatever, you'll get that a little
 bit better price. And then you're going to get the year end rally, which is going to
 be the Santa Claus rally between Christmas and the first five days of January. So that's
 going to provide you a lift. That's where you have portfolio rebalancing and managers
 putting money to work for the new year, et cetera. Now, why would those stock, why do
 I think that stock prices will decline? Well, the reason is, is that once we get through
 next week, so next week, inmates run the asylum. Nobody's around next week because it's holidays.
 So markets probably will be up a little bit next week, no big deal. Coming back from Thanksgiving
 and once we get and so we're going to start getting retail sales numbers where those good
 or bad and probably aren't going to be great. So that may put some pressure on, say, discretionary
 stocks, maybe staples, et cetera. But once we get the first two weeks of December, about
 25 percent of all mutual funds have to distribute their capital gains, interest and dividends
 for the year. So they've got to sell to make those distributions. And so once those distributions
 go out, they're going to have to have that they're going to have made those sales. Now
 they have to get their books back in order. And this is why you get this kind of buying
 in the year end where they start rebalancing their portfolios for that year in reporting
 where they better have Apple, Microsoft, Google, Nvidia, AMD. Those stocks better be on their
 books because those have been the big winners and they don't have them. They're going to
 lose clients. So it's about what they call career risk at the end of the day. So which
 is so crazy to interrupt at this Santa Claus rally, right, which is a real thing. It happens
 most years and you're explaining the majority of why it has to happen to a certain extent.
 It's all for optics.
 Correct.
 Money's got to go somewhere, but it goes into the year's high performers simply for optics.
 That's correct, because I may not have owned Nvidia all year long, but I'm going to own
 it in the last three days of the month or days of the year. So it goes out on that statement.
 Yeah. But that's just the way Wall Street works, because again, at the end of the day,
 when people get their perspectives and they look at it and go, well, my fund didn't own
 Eli Lilly or whatever it was, then I'm going to get a different fund because I'm actually
 writing an article about this on Tuesday is this when you take a look at the performance
 this year, it's not been great. The S&P has done well. The S&P is up roughly about 17
 percent for the year. Strip out those top seven stocks and nobody owns just seven stocks
 in their portfolio. The performance of the market is near flat. The equal weighted index
 is up about two percent for the year. Small cap and mid caps are negative for the year.
 I mean, outside of seven stocks, this market has done nothing this year, but people are
 going to look at their portfolio. They're going to get their adviser statements, whatever
 it is. And like, well, I didn't make any money last year and the market was up 17. You suck.
 I'm going to go find a different adviser. Well, the problem is, is that this is every
 portfolio manager. It's every adviser, because unless they own seven stocks or took a tremendous
 amount of risk, their performance is not great this year. If you own the balanced portfolio
 stocks and bonds, your performance is not great this year because of what happened with
 bonds. So you got it. So the point of this article on Tuesday is looking at these performance
 differentials and understanding why performance comparison is the worst thing you can do to
 your portfolio and to yourself in terms of investing, because you're going to look at
 an index that is driven by seven stocks and compare that to your portfolio and you're
 going to start making rash decisions about your management. They're going to be very
 poor outcomes next year.
 All right. So let me dig into that a little bit because I totally get what you're saying,
 but people need to compare their performance to something. So how would you recommend somebody,
 if they're not doing that, how would you recommend they measure their progress on their way to
 a goal over time?
 Well, so let me ask you a question. So let's put this in real life terms, right? So the
 media and Wall Street, they want you to compare the S&P index because performance chasing
 creates fees. If you didn't beat the S&P last year, well, then you need to move your money
 somewhere else. Well, that creates fees for Wall Street, right? So as soon as you move
 your money somewhere else in performance chase, that's going to create fees. But let's talk
 about what's important to Adam. So Adam wants to retire someday, I'm presuming, right? And
 so if you said, well, Lance, I want a million dollars to retire on and I've got X dollars
 today and so we can run some really simple math and we say, well, we need to grow your
 money at 4% a year to get you to your goal. So what's more important to you? Is it growing
 your money at 4% a year or chasing the S&P 500 index?
 Yeah, no, got it. So what you're saying basically is have a plan and measure yourself on milestones
 to the plan versus what the external world is doing.
 Right. Because here's the problems with chasing the index. Your portfolio has nothing to do
 with the S&P 500 index. The S&P 500 index has no cash. It has no fees. It pays no taxes.
 It pays no, it has no other withdrawal expenses on it. So there's, you know, there's not people
 taking money out of the S&P index. It can do what they call substitution. So you know,
 back in 2008, GM goes bankrupt. So you own GM and the index owns GM, right? So you sell,
 so the index says, well, we're getting rid of GM. We're kicking them out of our portfolio
 and we're going to put it in IBM. I'm just picking a stock. I don't remember what they
 placed GM with. But they stick in IBM that's a hundred dollars a share. So immediately
 the index recalibrates itself to this new holding of IBM at a hundred dollars a share
 and the index doesn't blip. You have to sell GM that you paid $50 for at zero because it
 goes bankrupt. And now you've got to come up with some money somewhere else, or you've
 got to take cash out of your portfolio from somewhere else to buy those shares of IBM.
 So the difference between your portfolio and the way an index works are entirely different.
 An index has no time horizon. You do. So when you're measuring your performance, the only
 thing you should look at three things when you measure your portfolio. One, what's my
 performance relative to what my goal is and how much risk am I taking to reach that goal?
 And secondly, or thirdly, rather, is look at that over a period of time, not the worst
 thing that you can do to your portfolio, measure your portfolio from January to December. It's
 a terrible way to measure performance. And I've said this, you and I had this conversation
 before, you should look at your portfolio over a three or four year period and say,
 how have I done over the last three or four years? Am I on track to reach my goals? You're
 going to have a bad year. Everybody's going to have a bad year, one year or the next.
 And the thing that we do that most often leads us to make the worst mistakes with our money
 is going, well, I missed energy last year, so I'm going to go put all my portfolio in
 energy because last year, energy was up 60%. This year, energy has sucked as an investment.
 It's one of the worst performing sectors of the market. So you jumped at it. You watched
 what was doing well last year. So you jumped into energy this year and didn't own the technology
 stocks which sucked last year and nobody wanted technology. In fact, in October, you and I
 had the conversation about my article talking about, are feigned stocks dead? And I wrote
 the article, no, they're not. They're going to come back with a vengeance. They've been
 the best performer. So this is the problem with chasing performance. What is the best
 performer this year? It's very often the worst performer next year. So look at your portfolio
 and say, okay, what didn't work for me this year? What do I need to change? How I've been
 doing over the last three years? Am I okay? And if you are, don't change anything. Just
 understand that markets cycle and things change and stay to your discipline because you're
 disciplining your strategy is what's going to work over time, not these emotional buys
 and sell decisions or moving your money from one manager to another. That's what makes
 you have the worst returns over time.
 Yeah. So I think it's such an important discussion. I'm glad you brought up the point about performance
 chasing because, again, because this goes to behavioral economics, but because we're
 human animals, we see somebody outperform the index and we say, oh, I want that guy
 on my team. I want to work with that manager or that fund or that sector. And what that
 more than often puts you at risk to is reversion of the mean. You're seeing the guy who had
 the outperforming year. And so statistically, he's likely not going to perform that as well
 the next year. And so people, as you said, tended to jump after the shiny outperformer
 and they're kind of almost guaranteeing themselves that they're going to underperform.
 So anyways, I'm glad you went through this. And Lance, I assume that measuring to your
 personal goal is what you do with your clients, their real investment advice. And the reason
 why I'm kind of letting us run long on this is because a big part of having you and the
 New Harbor guys who will also be returning to this channel on this channel regularly
 is so people can see what a good responsible financial advisor does for their clients.
 And whether folks you end up working with Lance's firm and the New Harbor firm or somebody
 totally different, I'm agnostic to it. I just want you to work with somebody who's good
 and Lance is modeling for you what from a thoughtful money standpoint is a quality responsible
 financial advisor does for clients. So how do you do it? Is it a year end process, but
 do you start somebody with goal setting and then you track that over the coming years?
 How do you do it?
 Yeah, no, absolutely. So I mean, everything that we do with our clients starts with a
 financial plan. And it's a very in depth, very detailed financial plan. We account for
 valuations and variable rates of return and all these different variables, inflation,
 economic outcomes, et cetera. And we factor all those into what could potentially happen
 to your money over a very long duration period of time and say, OK, if these all these things
 happen and we can we can create what we call a hurdle rate of 3 percent, 4 percent, 5 percent,
 whatever the number is, then we know that with certainty that we can get you to your
 goal. And so then we start modeling the portfolios around what that return rate needs to be.
 And if your return rate is too high, then we have to start making other decisions about
 your financial situation or spending too much money. You're not saving enough, whatever
 it is, because it's requiring too big of a return on your money. So again, so you if
 you run your financial plan or somebody tells you, oh, just invest your money, you're make
 eight percent a year. That's not realistic. Markets don't do that. Markets don't generate
 eight percent rates of return every single year. And and that having too high of an expected
 rate of return requires you to take on way too much risk in your portfolio. So when you
 have these big downturns in the markets, it can absolutely devastate you. A good example
 that people tend to forget is that if you were 45 years of age and you want to retire
 at 65 in the year 2000, you spent 17 years making no money because you were investing
 in a market that was overvalued and had a lot of other issues with it. But for the next
 17 years, you made no money towards your retirement. And finally, in year 17, here you are, you're
 facing your retirement and you're very far away. You're 17 years away from your goal.
 So a lot of people had to shelve their retirement plans because they plan for these very high
 rates of annualized rates of return that just didn't materialize. Because of the rally that
 we've had in the markets over the last 13 years, we're very likely going to move into
 a period of very low returns going forward. So if you're modeling out six, seven, eight
 percent annualized rates of return, that's fine. Understand you're going to take a whole
 lot of risks to get there. And if you're wrong, it's going to devastate your retirement. But
 if your return rate is three or four percent, you're probably going to be able to achieve
 that. So having realistic expectations about how markets work and what you can generate
 is most valuable to you reaching your ultimate retirement goal.
 All right. So talking about three or four percent dependable returns, it's a great segue
 into the next part of the conversation, which is bonds, which right now, the safest bonds
 out there are returning five percent or four and a half percent right now.
 Not anymore.
 Yeah, not anymore. Real quick, before we try to lop the bonds, is there anything else about
 this chart that we've had up here that you want to talk to?
 No, no, no, that's it. And again, it's just the way I try to end this article when I'm
 talking about expectations and performance and those type of things. I use a simple example
 and it's this. I say, Adam, I really appreciate all you've done for me this year. I'm going
 to buy you a Mercedes for Christmas. So you're pretty happy because I bought you a Mercedes
 until you find out that I bought the other guy that I do work with about him to Mercedes.
 So now you're not so happy, right? You feel you feel I don't I didn't treat you as well
 as the other guy. But are you really that bad off because you only got one Mercedes?
 Right. And that's how we have to think about, you know, our money is that we're always chasing
 what somebody else had or what somebody else got. And does it really matter? We have to
 learn to be happy with what we have and have and be good enough with the things that we're
 getting because the mistakes are made when we start chasing unrealistic expectations.
 Yeah, I am. By the way, I didn't really buy your Mercedes. So no, I know, which is why
 I feel terrible now. You may remember a couple of months ago on one of these programs, one
 of our videos here, Lance, I shared the social science experiment with the capuchin monkeys
 to show how not just humans, but all animals are wired for perceived injustice. And basically
 for the folks that didn't see that the researcher feeds these two monkeys cucumbers and monkeys
 like cucumbers. They're totally happy to have them. And the monkey, you know, they have
 to like put a little rock in a dish. And if they do, the researcher gives them a cucumber
 as a reward. Monkeys will do that all day long. They're totally happy. But then the
 researcher starts giving one of the monkeys grapes, which monkeys really like and still
 gives the other one cucumbers. And you see the second the other monkey sees his buddy
 get the grape and then he does the same task and he gets the cucumber. He's like, what?
 And then he does it one more time and he starts like throwing the cucumber down and banging
 his little monkey fist and he throws the rock at the researcher. He's just so mad. And it's
 like he's getting something that he likes and would do all day. But the fact that his
 buddy is now getting the grape just turns him ballistic. And that's what humans do.
 And that's how our emotions get us really into trouble. Okay, so moving on to bonds
 because there's a lot to talk about with bonds and we're beginning to run out of time here.
 This is your second victory lap that I want to hand to you, which is you have been, I
 mean, I don't know if you can take the full victory lap yet, but as the US tenure was
 creeping up and creeping up and getting up there near 5%, I know the chorus of people
 saying Lance, you and your partner, Mike Liebowitz have been super bullish on bonds and you've
 been buying TLT and you've said you've been buying even more in your personal account.
 And man, dude, you're just wrong. Don't you get it? We're in a new paradigm here, new
 secular shift, higher inflation, higher interest rates here to stay. And every week we would
 revisit this on this program and you would explain your logic and why you hadn't really
 changed your main thesis yet. Game's not over for you yet, but you've gotten a lot of relief.
 Tenure now down to 4.4% I think at the moment that we're talking here. So talk about what
 you see the bond market doing right now. And of course, a lot of that drop came after the
 latest CPI number that came out in October and everybody is all of a sudden thinking,
 okay, whoa, inflation is getting under control. Fed's not going to have to be higher for longer.
 The pivots may be closer than we thought. Okay, let's start bringing rates down in anticipation
 of that.
 Yeah. So a couple of things. First of all, I was buying a lot more as rates pushed 5%.
 The undervaluation of bonds relative to basically everything else was getting extreme. And so
 I was buying more. I recently took some of that trade. I told you then it was a trade.
 And so I recently took some of that trade off the table earlier this week.
 So you booked profits. Congratulations.
 Booked some profits on that. I still own my core, right? So I still have the core long
 position that I'm not selling and won't sell it anytime soon. There'll be a point to where
 when we get into recession and yields drop towards our ultimate target, we will sell
 it then and then we'll start buying, beating up corporates or whatever we're going to buy.
 But the core is still there. So I did trade. I did take advantage of that, that kind of
 irrational fear in the markets and traded that little piece. But you know, the two things
 of actually several three things have happened now that suggests that the Fed is now on hold.
 First is the employment report came in a lot weaker than expected. That's probably going
 to continue again this month as we're starting to see employment really kind of hitting some
 final headwinds. CPI came in a lot weaker than expected. Year-over-year comparisons
 are going to continue to drag inflation lower, particularly as rent, which has dropped sharply
 in that homeowner's equivalent ramp, that runs a big lag and that's going to feed in.
 That's really just now starting to feed into the CPI report. So that's over 30% of CPI.
 That's why it matters because it's such a big chunk of CPI.
 I mean, everything else could be up and that's going to drag the whole index lower. But oil
 prices. Now, by the way, let me clarify something really quick. Oil prices have nothing to do
 with CPI. Zero. Energy is what's involved in CPI. So in other words, it's the offshoots
 of oil prices. So it's gasoline, it's heating oil, it's heating costs, utility costs. That's
 what's actually in CPI. That makes up 7% of CPI. And it also runs with a three month lag,
 so, you know, oil prices have been coming down fairly sharply. That's going to start
 applying some pressure as well. But if you take a look at the latest CPI report, I run
 a couple of different measures of CPI. So there's, of course, headline or score. I run
 a measure that is X healthcare and rent. And the reason I run healthcare and rent outside
 of that inflation index is because that's a fixed cost for most of us. I've been renting
 so that, you know, we talked about last year, you know, I sold my house and I'm renting
 and we're now remodeling a new house, an old house that we're going to move into. So I've
 been paying rent for two years. My rent hasn't changed for two years. I've had zero inflation
 on rent. My healthcare costs have not changed over the last year because they're contractually
 fixed for a year. Now we're about to get into open renewal and I'm probably going to see
 an uptick in healthcare costs, right? But now I'm going to get inflation in healthcare.
 I don't get it every month. So if you take a look at, you know, the inflation that the
 average American gets outside of rent and healthcare, it's actually about two point
 six percent. So it's actually coming down fairly well towards that two percent target
 that the Fed wants. And again, kind of across the board, we're starting to see that kind
 of lower pressure. Remember, we were talking about nine percent inflation in June of last
 year. You and I were talking about, you know, inflation had probably peaked. It was going
 to come lower. So, you know, we've been working through that cycle and that cycle of low inflation
 is definitely coming. So these very high interest rates that we had were above and beyond what
 was actually going on with inflation. If you take a look at the interest rate of bonds
 versus the inflation expectations, there was about a one percent gap. So that gap has to
 close inflation and interest rate. Inflation expectations and interest rates should be
 fairly close to each other. They track pretty closely. There's a big gap. So that's all
 trying to just correct itself. We have a lot of psychological impacts on the bond market
 that are now starting to get backed out. We're not going to go to two percent interest rates
 in the next month. We're probably going to stall here between four or four and a half
 percent, something like that. That's about where we should be with inflation, where it
 is right now. And economic growth just kicking off four point nine percent in the third quarter.
 Fourth quarter is going to be around two percent. So if we're between four, four and a quarter,
 four and a half, that's about right for where we are right now. Now, if the Fed starts cutting
 rates next year, we get slower economic growth, yields are going to fall further.
 OK, got it. And I want to get into that part in a moment because a lot of people that I've
 interviewed recently, certainly all the interviews so far on Thoughtful Money, people are definitely
 feeling pretty pessimistic about next year. And I do want to get into that for you. But
 I do find with the people that I'm talking to right now, one of the areas where there's
 probably the greatest disparity of forecasts is inflation. You take a guy like David Rosenberg,
 who I just interviewed, he says we're going to be at like one percent by the end of next
 year. You talk to other people and they think, yeah, I know we're going to be kind of in
 a 70s style, inflation is going to be stickier and it's going to keep reigniting and especially
 as the administration keeps doing as much stimulus as it can, that's going to keep inflation
 kind of popping along here. Until quite recently, it was higher oil prices are going to create
 more inflation. Even though they've come down, we don't know what's going to happen. Oil
 prices could go back up. We don't know. I'm just pointing out that that's one area right
 now where I see the greatest -- there's a lot of unity of where things are headed in
 many other dimensions with the folks I've been interviewing, but that's one where they
 really seem to be having lots of differences of opinion. It sounds like you think that
 disinflation is going to continue to be the name of the game through next year and maybe
 pretty substantially if you think one percent by the end of next year is likely.
 Well, I'm just saying that, again, you have to understand and we've talked about this
 before is that you can have all these narratives, high oil prices or this or that or the other
 thing. At the end of the day, all that matters is economic growth and what is happening within
 the overall economy because the economy drives. You have high interest rates. That impedes
 economic growth because that strips away. We're already starting to see consumers having
 more trouble with spending, retail sales, et cetera.
 Dude, remember, you're talking to Mr. Lag Effect here. I'm right there with you.
 Right. So that's going to curtail economic growth. So let's step back for a moment and
 talk about inflation. So in order to have inflation, you have to have supply and demand.
 You have to have a supply demand imbalance. In other words, you have to have more demand
 and you have supply of goods and services to meet that demand. That leads to higher
 prices. That's inflation. So all we're talking about is higher prices. Where do higher prices
 come from? They come from supply demand imbalances. So why did we have inflation in 2020-2021?
 Because we shut down the economy and had a massive influx of demand because we sent stimulus
 checks directly to households and they went and did exactly what you wanted to do, which
 was spend it.
 So we wanted to buy stuff and fewer things to buy because of the supply chain breakages.
 Yep, exactly. So if I've only got one widget to sell you, then it's an open market. I'm
 gonna say, "Adam, will you only pay me for my widget because this guy over here just
 offered me X and the other guy offered me Y. So you better bid Z if you want it." Right?
 That's inflation. That's all it is. It's nothing magical. It's nothing fantastical. It's just
 a function of supply and demand.
 So having said that, let's talk about next year. First of all, nobody knows what the
 hell is going to happen next year. I don't know. Nobody knows. Nobody's got an idea.
 So we're all just guessing. But let's talk about reality of what could happen next year.
 So the guess that said that if you have more stimulus from the government, you have more
 inflation. That's a true statement. So if somehow the Biden administration or whoever
 gets elected president next November, whatever it is, is able to pass some type of stimulative
 spending bill, send checks to households or pass another $2 trillion worth of some type
 of green energy bill or whatever it is, then yeah, you're gonna get inflation because you're
 gonna dump a whole bunch of money into the economy and that's gonna create higher prices
 because there's a demand supply imbalance. Without that, you're not gonna have inflation
 because higher interest rates, student loan payments, those type of things, that's reducing
 the demand on the economy. We just heard from Target and Walmart. Both companies reported
 earnings, right? Target was up 20% after their earnings announcement, not because they had
 stellar earnings. It was only because the earnings weren't as bad as everybody thought
 they were going to be. Their sales still declined over 4% and they said, "Look, traffic's slowing
 down. Our sales are slowing down. We're forecasting a week next quarter." Walmart said exactly
 the same thing.
 Yeah. And sorry, I actually have it printed out here for Walmart because they dropped
 8% last night after earnings.
 By the way, we bought Walmart yesterday.
 Yeah. And specific that you what?
 We bought Walmart after the earnings.
 Did you? Okay. Well, then I want to hear why because the CFO on the call said they saw
 a sharp fall off in sales during the last two weeks of October and management said there's
 still strain on the consumer and they are more cautious than they were three months
 ago. So they're definitely ringing the bell and saying, "Hey, consumers looking like they're
 starting to struggle." So I'm just curious, why not let the knife drop further? Why buy
 Walmart now?
 Again, as we've always told you, we always look to buy a starter position.
 Okay. So this is your nibble in?
 It's my nibble. But I mean, look, Walmart has got a very strong positive trend going
 back over a long period of time. It's a well-run company. Their earnings report was actually
 very good outside of their guidance. So the 8% drop was unjustified relative to even what
 a more dire outlook for their earnings might be over the next quarter. So it's just undervalued
 relative to that. So anyway.
 Right. And sorry. And if you expect sort of recession, you want to be on the staple side
 of the trade or it's the staple side of the economy, not the discretionary side.
 I don't know what stores you have out in California, but in Houston, as an example, we have stores
 like Randall's, which are where they're more kind of an upscale kind of a grocery store.
 And so things are a bit more pricey, a little bit more expensive to go to. Or Whole Foods,
 very expensive store to shop at. So when things get really tough, I don't want to own a Whole
 Foods. I want to own a Walmart because 60% of Walmart sales are food. So people are going
 to be shopping for the cheapest product and that's where they're going to wind up going.
 And that's the reason we bought Walmart over Target is Target's only about 20% is their
 food. So they mostly rely on retail goods, which, again, I can cut back on buying underwear,
 socks and shirts and pants. But I've got to buy groceries. So if only 20% of my grocery
 or my sales are groceries, I want Walmart, which is 60. And we also own Costco because
 Costco prints money because of that membership fee and they just increase their membership
 fee. And so people may not buy as much at Costco, but they're going to keep paying that
 membership fee. So it's just ATM money going into that company. So that's all we own those
 on the staple side. Those are the two companies that we own because in a recession, they should
 do the best.
 Okay, got it. So I guess let's just grab the recession bull by the horns here for a second.
 I recall from way back when, a month ago, you were saying, hey, I think several stocks
 are going to surprise the upside going into the end of the year. But you said, from a
 probabilistic standpoint, it wouldn't surprise you to have recession materialized next year.
 If I remember correctly, I think you were saying the second half of 2024. Just to let
 you know, the folks that I have interviewed on this channel since it launched way back
 a week ago, have kind of universally said, they expect to see things really start to
 break in the first half of this year. I just interviewed Ted Oakley. That interview hasn't
 aired yet, but he thinks it's going to happen in the first half of the year. I interviewed
 Fred Hickey. He thinks it's going to happen in the first half of the year. This is not
 like January 1st, but somewhere between January and July. And with Fred, it's interesting
 because, well, I do think he thinks it's recession driven, but he thinks that what's really going
 to break the markets is going to be a weakness of the generals, of the magnificent seven.
 As you know, Fred is famous for his newsletter, The High Tech Strategist, which has been publishing
 since the mid eighties. And he is actually quite bearish on the big tech complex right
 now on those magnificent seven stocks. And he thinks that he is predicting that next
 year is the year where they really start breaking hearts. And of course they've pulled the markets
 up with it. And so he expects they're going to pull the market down with him. And then
 the last Tom McClellan, when I interviewed him for the conference that I did a month
 ago, he's got all his black magic voodoo TA stuff and he's actually got like the month.
 He's actually got a chart that basically says, he's like, this is when I think it's going
 to break. But in his words, 2024 is the years when the wheels come off. But again, all these
 guys are a little more front-loaded than you are. I think Darius Dale, when I talked to
 him too was pegging it somewhere between February and June. Anyways, I just wanted to provide
 that context. Are you still thinking second half of the year? Has anything changed since
 you and I talked a month ago?
 Not really. Again, timing is always the issue, right? So they could be right.
 It's a sucker's game. I mean, you're always putting yourself at risk when you put a timeframe
 on.
 But again, the one thing that, look, everybody was calling a recession in 2023 and it didn't
 happen. I'm sorry, 2022 and it didn't happen. And so now we're into the no recession, soft
 landing scenario.
 Sorry to interrupt on that, but I wanted you to incorporate this in your answer. Talking
 to Rosenberg, he fell on the sword and he said, "Yeah, I'm wrong. This recession took
 longer to materialize than I thought." But he said, "It's because that pig that got shoved
 in the Python was so damn big." And he's like, "It was so big, we really couldn't fully understand
 how big it was." And it's just bigger than we thought, but it's finite and it is eventually
 now exiting the system.
 Yeah, yeah. And that's my whole point is that, and again, you and I talked about the pig
 in the Python, I wrote an article on it in 2022 saying, "Hey, you don't realize how much
 stimulus is in the economy. M2 is a percentage of GDP, blah, blah, blah." It is coming down,
 but it's not out of the system yet. And that's why I'm kind of backloading my recession forecast.
 There's still a lot of money in this system between the Inflation Reduction Act, the CHIPS
 Act, the stimulus checks that are still floating around, benefits, et cetera. There's just
 so much money that is out there and still in the system. It's keeping things going.
 It's like, why aren't retail sales just falling off a cliff right now? And they just keep
 chugging along. We just printed 4.9% GDP growth in third quarter. How the hell did that happen?
 That's because of all that money. And that's just going to take time. So if you take a
 look at the economic data, it is slowing, but it's not dropping off a cliff. Take a
 look at the recent ISM reports. They're ticking up here a little bit. And you and I had this
 conversation back in October. I wrote an article about, "Hey, be careful. These things don't
 go straight downhill, right? You're going to get these bounces in this economic data."
 And we're seeing that, right? We're getting these bounces. And so that's going to give
 the economy some relief here. Then they're going to roll over again. Then they're going
 to bounce. And there's enough money that we could do this for another couple of quarters
 before we get some real recessionary growth or real recessionary indications. And it's
 not going to be a deep recession. We're not talking about 10% unemployment. We're not
 talking about economic growth, negative 6%. This is going to be maybe a negative 1% GDP
 type situation. It's going to be maybe a 5% unemployment rate. And the reason is, is that
 we laid off half of the economy in 2020. And we've only hired them back. Take a look at
 the employment to population ratio. It's lower than it was at the peak of the market in 2019.
 We just never hired all these people back. And we have population growth during that
 period of time. So companies are going to, you know, and you and I were talking about
 you would like, every time I'd come on, you know, last year and early this year, you give
 me the latest layoffs. All those layoffs have been done. And for most companies, they hired
 the people they wanted to hire back and they didn't really over hire. We haven't been through
 a long period of growth where companies over hired for jobs and we haven't had a bunch
 of excess hiring. So we're probably not going to see this big, massive drop off in employment.
 It's going to, we'll have some unemployment increase, but it's not going to be this massive
 wave where we just.
 So let me, so I don't disagree with your stats, but let me, let me just ask you this because
 it's sticking in my mind, which is, you know, pal, all he's talked about for two years basically
 is we just have way more job openings than we have people to fill them. If we didn't
 over hire, I know there's a lot of double counting and stuff that goes on in there,
 but if we didn't over hire, then why aren't there all these people around saying, look
 dude, I need a job. I want a job, right? It's still, I mean, the quit rate ratios come down.
 It's becoming a tighter job market, but it does not at all from, from at least my view
 seem to be a market where people are having a tough time finding employment.
 Right. No, it's not. I mean, if you want a job, there's probably a job out there for
 you, but we are starting to see if you pay attention to initial continuing claims that's
 been rising for months now.
 Yeah.
 So the people that are out of the job.
 Still from low levels, but yeah, I think this is finally beginning to get people's attention
 like, Oh, this looks like the trend is reversed. Yeah.
 But, but again, if you just take a look at the employment to population again, you know,
 the job openings numbers, you got to really take those with a grain of salt and we've
 we've spilled a ton of ink on that. Yeah. I mean, just, you know, I have, I have a job
 open. I always have a job opening at my company, right? We don't hire anybody for it, but there's
 always a job opening. If we have to find the unicorn of an employee, I'll hire you, right?
 If you happen to be that unicorn, there's a job waiting on you. But I mean, the, the,
 the stack deck for those credentials better be there. Right. I mean, it's gotta be, you
 know, it's, so there's a lot of jobs like that. There's a lot of jobs are sitting out
 there that will hire for, but basically they're not getting filled. And that's why you have
 these job openings are sitting out there. So kind of just throw that out the window.
 It doesn't mean a whole lot. But the employment to population ratio, you take a look at those
 numbers, take a look at your you take a look at your labor force participation rates. Those
 things tell you that we haven't really, and again, cause you're considering the number
 of people that are coming in through immigration, birth, naturalization, et cetera, that are
 coming into the workforce. There's a lot of people sitting out there that don't have jobs.
 Yes. We don't count them by the way. No, I know. Well, I mean, so we've talked about
 this forever and we got to move on cause we're running short of time, but, but yes, first
 off there is the, not in the workforce population that the government just doesn't count. That's
 over a hundred million people, a hundred million working age adults. Right. I mean, it's crazy.
 Right. But my, my general point was just sort of you and I have certainly lived through
 periods of time where there's millions of people who want jobs and can't get them. Right.
 That's not certainly what we've had for the past bunch of years. And it still doesn't
 seem to be that case now. So when you're talking about the type of recession that you see coming,
 it sounds like you're right now calling for a mildish one. I don't want to, I don't want
 to undersell it. No, I know it's not mildish. It's, I would say a normal recession. It's
 I don't, you know, when Pete, when you talk about recession, most people, they immediately
 focus on the financial crisis, right? We're not going to have a financial crisis. We don't
 have the mortgage issue that we had back. We're on the subprime credit issue, those
 types of things. It's not going to be that type of recession. This is going to be a more
 normal recession, a, a.com, you know, type recession of the economy. So you're, you're
 negative one, 2% growth. It's not great by the way. I'm just saying, I'm not saying it's
 a, it's a, it's a good thing, you know, it's still a recession, but don't expect you're
 going to have a, you know, a 2020 shutdown type of session where GDP falls by 30%. That's
 not going to happen, right? And, and, and I mean, I think we have developed this such
 a thin skin, right? I mean, we we've, we've morphed as a society to try to do everything
 we can to ever keep a recession from happening, right? Where I think we now equate recession
 with depression. People hear recession and they think, oh my gosh, we're all living under
 a bridge. And it's like, no, no, no, no, it's just, it's a, it's a bad patch where for quarters
 or maybe a year plus, you know, you might have a tough time, you know, making as much
 or maybe you get laid off and it's hard to find work during that period, but it is not,
 we're going back to barter society.
 Right. And that's my point is, you know, let's keep, you know, keep keeping things in perspective
 and go back to that bell curve, right? Normal recession and normal growth are, you know,
 a 68% probability that you're going to get. And I think I would focus on that. Now, if
 things potentially get worse, that's possible. But again, if things are, if we're in a recession,
 the Fed's going to be cutting rates are going to go back to QE rates are going to go to
 zero. The stock market's going to stumble maybe 10 to 15 to 20% because of what we look,
 we've already been through two years of zero returns for the market. So, you know, whatever
 bear markets you're going to get, you've already rung out a big chunk of that process over
 the last two years outside of seven stocks. So, you know, if you get to another recessionary
 downturn next year, you may have 10 to 15% down on stocks because again, they've never
 actually, you know, for the vast majority of stocks, they didn't recover this year.
 So again, there's not a lot of, of, you know, devastation to come in the financial markets.
 So again, there's, it's not going to be this massive rip the rug out from under you and
 everything, you're going to lose a ton of money. It's going to be maybe another year
 of no returns, lots of volatility, difficult to navigate. I don't necessarily disagree
 with the fame might come under some, some rough patch next year. They had a rough patch
 in 2022. Nobody wanted to own them. They were down 20%. Then they can get enough of them.
 So yeah, I mean, we could go through another year like that, where they underperform and
 maybe staples, defensive stocks you know, those healthcare, which has been a terrible
 performer this year, maybe healthcare is the place to be next year.
 Okay. And well, I don't want to speak for you, but Rosenberg definitely said his theme
 for 2024 is bonds have more fun.
 Absolutely. Yeah. Well, I've been saying, I've been saying for a year that 2024 bonds
 are going to grossly outperform stocks, period.
 Okay. All right. Well, look, we got to start wrapping it up here, by the way, I do want
 to, I'm looking forward to talking about Fred Hickey's observations with you in next week's
 video. That's going to come out the day after this video airs. So if you can watch at least
 part of that over the next week, Lance, it'd be fun to hear your thoughts.
 I don't do this show to have homework.
 I know you don't. I know I'll send you some clips, so we'll keep it quick. But the fact
 again that Fred has made his bread and butter following this industry for what, 40 years
 or whatever. And he's, to a certain extent, almost paid to have an incentive to be bullish
 on his stocks. He's basically saying it's not the year to be in them. So it'd be interesting
 to see. Ted Oakley as well said, "Look, what we haven't seen, if a bear market is indeed
 to happen, is a capitulation." We didn't see that in 2022. And he said, Ted's colorful
 languages, he said, "In the capitulation, along with the infantry men, they shoot the
 generals too." And he looks at the magnificent seven as the generals. So just wrapping up
 the finance part of the discussion here, trades. What trades have you guys made over the past
 week? And any notable ones over the past month that you made while we weren't talking that
 you know about?
 No, really, it's been pretty quiet over the past couple of weeks. Again, I added to bonds,
 sold some of my trading position in my bonds. I was only trade outside of last week. Last
 week, basically just doing some tax loss selling. We've been long a company called CBS in the
 health care space. Love CBS, great yield. Stock has great fundamentals to it. It's just
 had just a tough year with health care in general has been a tough year. So we sold
 that for the tax loss. We're going to buy it back at some point. But we've been adding
 in some other stocks as well. We bought a starter position at Berkshire Hathaway a couple
 of weeks ago. It's a nice little pullback.
 Okay, I'm glad to talk about that for a sec.
 Yeah, so Berkshire Hathaway is a way to kind of closet index the S&P. But it's actually
 just it does well. The fundamentals are good. Obviously, it's Warren Buffett, but it holds
 up well within the overall market. There's just kind of this natural gravitation to Berkshire
 Hathaway as a place to hide money. And so you see a lot of professional managers, money
 managers, etc. And this is why one thing we talked about the mindless robot, right passive
 investing, Berkshire Hathaway is those top 10 stocks. So it gets money flows. As money's
 going into S&P index funds, it automatically gets money flows because it's in those top
 10 holdings. So we've had a little bit of a position that we were underweight financials.
 And so Berkshire Hathaway is in the financial sector because of its insurance holdings.
 So we needed a finance stock, but we're still a little bit worried about the bank stocks
 in general, because if we start to see interest rates do fall, and the Fed does start cutting
 rates, that cuts net interest income for banks. So again, just kind of a way to play financials.
 We also own Visa in the financial sector as well, because they just generate cash every
 time you swipe your credit card, they generate money. So they're a little bit more recession
 proof. So in the financial sector, we just kind of building some holdings in that area.
 And then we added Walmart on the pullback just because of fundamentals. So the company
 really didn't want that big of a decline. But this earnings season, that's been very
 much the case, that companies that have good earnings, but maybe just guided down a little
 bit got completely hammered. So there's been some really good opportunities to add to positions
 like we added to video we added to AMD. I've done some other stuff like that around the
 edges of the portfolio just to bring weights up, but we still have a net. We're running
 about 51% exposure out of 60. So we're still carrying about 9% cash. And what we're looking
 for is this pullback in the first couple of weeks of December, then we'll put that 9%
 back to work for that end of the year rally.
 Okay. All right. So you plan to be positioned at 100% of your 60% for the rally if you get
 that dip that you're expecting. Okay. Great. Just curious on Berkshire, is that a nibble
 position or is that a full position now in the portfolio?
 No, it's just a nibble. It's had a nice little rally here over the last couple of weeks.
 I'd like to see it pull back a little bit, maybe towards support where I can add another
 weight to that particular position and bring it up to market weight.
 Okay. All right. Great. All right, Lance. Well, look, we get to switch chairs here now.
 If you want to pull up the email questions that I sent you, folks, as promised, I just
 want to address directly a number of the most common questions that folks have been sending
 my way since I announced that I was leaving to go independent and start Thoughtful Money.
 And I will do my best to answer any other questions that you ask me in the comment section
 below or via email or on Substack or on Twitter. I'm doing my best. I'm literally kind of drowning
 under the volume of these comments. So I thought I'd hit the highlights here. So Lance, far
 away with the first one there.
 Yeah, no problem. So there's a couple of questions that actually kind of all go together. So
 probably you can answer these all together. But of course, I've been getting a lot of
 people asking me questions like, "Well, I can understand why Adam left. He sold out
 at the top, and now he's going to go do something else. So take the money and run." I mean,
 that's why you left the other company, right?
 So that has been the most hurtful to my heart question, not because people think that might
 have been the case. I think it's a natural potential assumption to make, but just because
 it's so wrong. And I was limited. I still am limited in fully what I can say just by
 contracts and things like that. But in my farewell video on Wealthion, it was a short
 video. It was kind of scripted by committee. So there was a lot of other stuff I would
 have loved to have said, but I just wasn't able to. But let me just make it super clear
 to folks. A factor in why I went independent was that as confusing as I know it must sound
 to people. I conceived of the company. I started it. I ran it and ran almost all aspects of
 it, but I didn't own it. I actually didn't own any equity in Wealthion. And that kind
 of goes back to sort of how it was created, the conditions under which it was created.
 And that's a story for a different day. And again, I'm kind of very limited on what I
 can say there, but I had been part of another company that got absorbed into a bigger company.
 And so the foundation, the plumbing of what became Wealthion was something I had built
 over the previous 10 years, but I didn't own it anymore, but I had a big vision for it.
 So anyways, to be able to launch the company and create my vision, there was an imperfect
 set of circumstances that as time went on and the company actually became quite successful,
 those imperfections just weighed more heavily. And then I decided the best thing for everybody
 to be able to run the business as best I wanted to run it for you, the audience, was to do
 so as an independent. And so I had to let the folks who own the company take it and
 run it. And so there was no sale. I had nothing to sell. So just to be super clear, Adam didn't
 get a pile of cash for it. In fact, he got no cash for it. He had to spend a lot of cash
 and found thoughtful money. But don't feel bad for me. I have been very blessed in, I
 believe finally in my professional career, finding what I'm supposed to be doing for
 a living. And that's really what Wealthion started for me. And now I'm just doing that
 fully independently where I have 100% control and can bring exactly the type of content
 to you all exactly the way that I want to do it. So did that clear up the question,
 guys?
 Well, yeah. And it kind of answered the other question, which was I wanted to ask you the
 question of, did you learn your lesson about having partners this time around and having
 investors?
 Nothing negative about the folks that I worked with there. I want to be really clear, amicable
 separation. I wish those guys well. I think they wish me well. But it is funny. Somebody
 commented to me as I've been going through the transition, they said, "Oh, there's this
 old adage. What's the only ship that doesn't float? Partnership." And it's funny because
 look, I think there are lots of examples of successful partnerships, but I can say that
 in making this transition, I have had so many entrepreneurs contact me with their horror
 stories of partnerships that didn't end up. And I want to make it really clear. There's
 not a horror story. Like I said, lots of goodwill towards the organization. I'm cheering them
 on. I think they're cheering me on, but I'm just super excited to where I'm going to be
 able to take thoughtful money from here and super excited with just the initial results.
 We've had so many people find us already, and we've been in soft launch the past week,
 so we really haven't even been doing any loud cheering of the launch of this channel. And
 with that said, we've got really robust views on the videos already, much more robust than
 I would have expected just a week in. And just yesterday, Lance, just a couple of days
 ago, I put the Thoughtful Money feed on the major podcast platforms. So folks, if you
 prefer to listen to a podcast versus on YouTube, we're now available on Apple Podcasts, Google
 Podcasts and Spotify. But I just found out yesterday that we were number 14 on investing
 podcasts on Apple Podcasts. I'd never been that high before with the previous company.
 So it's super nice to see this new channel already off to such a great launch.
 That's awesome. So that kind of brings us back to, I guess, the whole name of Thoughtful
 Money. And are you going to do anything different this time than you were doing before?
 Yeah, I've been getting a lot of questions about that. And I think the easiest way to
 answer it is everything that you loved about my work previously, you're going to get. So
 none of that's going to change. If you really like these deep dive interviews, if you really
 like the weekly recap with Lance, all that great stuff is going to continue from here.
 But we've got the opportunity to do more. And that's delivering new and different types
 of content. And some of that is still on the drawing board. So allow me to be a little
 bit opaque on it for right now. But basically, there are things like more ways to engage
 as community, more ways to engage, to learn in more depth with courses. Hopefully, I'm
 going to be able to do more type of explainer videos, which is where I do a deep dive into
 something pretty practical that the audience cares about. You might remember in the past,
 Lance did videos about how to buy T-bills or how to buy I-bonds or explaining banking
 crisis is going on. Can we do a special report on that and break down what's happening? Those
 explainer videos, they take a lot more time to produce than the interviews do. And as
 a one man show, which I was before, it was just hard to get the bandwidth to do it. Now
 that I'm structuring the business exactly the way that I want to, I'm finding resources
 that might be able to help me do that a lot more scalably than I was able to before. So
 anyways, folks, you should hopefully see a lot more of this type of stuff. Also, there's
 some more platforms like Substack where the business that I ran before Wealthion, I actually
 was doing a lot of writing for about a decade. And it's kind of fun to have the ability to
 go back to writing when I've got the bandwidth to do that because some topics can be explained,
 I think more effectively in prose with charts. And you do that a lot with your articles that
 you're writing about every single topic that I asked you about, Lance. So I'm finding there's
 some interesting complementarity between these different platforms where they can kind of
 play off of each other and enhance the total offering for everybody. So more to come on
 this, but again, the simple answer is everything you liked is going to stay. We're hopefully
 going to add some more stuff on top of it that you're going to like as well.
 So speaking of Substack though, which is great, and I'm a big fan of Substack, but are you
 thinking about starting to charge people to watch Thoughtful Money?
 No, with a little asterisk next to it, which is, no. I mean, the mission of Thoughtful
 Money is to educate and empower regular investors to fund their life goals. That's what we're
 all about. With a mission like that, you have to provide your content free to the world.
 So 98% of the content I create is going to be freely available to everybody. That being
 said, what the Substack platform does allow for is the delivery of some additional premium
 content to folks in certain situations. And right now, what's been great about Substack,
 it's been a way for me to provide people important updates on where the Thoughtful Money movement
 is going, going forward, when we're going to launch, what new features we're thinking
 of and getting input from people, giving people an opportunity to talk during the week, community-wise.
 But also, Substack lets you provide premium content and so many people have been upgrading
 to the premium service just to say, "Adam, I love what you're doing. You've given everything
 away for free. I just want to support you." And so they're signing up for the premium
 service. They were signing up for the premium service in return for nothing. I don't want
 to be the kind of guy that just passes a hat and say, "Please give me free money." So for
 people who are paying to support me, I'm going to work to give them premium content and there's
 two ways I'm doing it right now.
 One is you may remember when I had the bandwidth to do it, I was writing what I called Adam's
 notes after the major interviews on this channel, which is, "Hey, I'm doing a gazillion of these
 interviews. What about the one I just did was most notable for me?" And so I would take
 the time when I had it to write up my takeaways from the video, which I thought was useful
 for people for two reasons. One, it really let them crawl inside my head. What about
 this interview stood out? But also, I want people to be able to lean back and really
 listen to the interviews and not worry about having to scramble to take a ton of notes.
 And so with the Adam's notes, it lets people just really be fully engaged listeners knowing
 that the key points are going to be summarized for them later on. So people who subscribe
 to the Substack Premium service are getting my Adam's notes now going forward. Secondly,
 there will be, I'm still figuring out exactly how it's going to manifest, but there will
 be at least one premium video a month that I'll offer to that audience as well. So this
 is again, kind of a give and take, but if people are going to be generous enough to
 subscribe to support this channel, I want to make sure that they're getting something
 valuable in exchange for the generosity. But beyond that, that content I'm talking about
 is a tiny fraction of all the content that we're producing and will produce going forward,
 which will remain freely available to the world.
 So let's get to the important question. Is the wood background coming back or are you
 stuck with that premium?
 Yeah, great question. It's very sad that the wood background could not make the transition
 along with me. And I really liked the background. It took me a while to find it and I was very
 happy with it. And I am realizing now how lucky I was to have found it because I've
 been going through a whole bunch of different background options and really none of them
 is really meeting my standards. What I have here right now, I'd hoped it was going to
 be good and it's green leather. It's actually really quality background. I was kind of going
 for that like banker's desk kind of look, those great old antique wooden desks with
 the green leather writing tops on them and whatnot. But I've gotten enough feedback from
 folks and I agree. I don't think it 100% hits the mark here. So I'm going back to the well.
 I am thankful for this. It was good enough to be able to have something to be able to
 launch this channel and folks have been nicely tolerant of it, but I've had enough conversations
 with enough design oriented viewers to say, "Hey, Adam, there's probably a way to raise
 the bar a little bit higher here." So stay tuned.
 Right. And of course, I guess the big question is what can your viewers do to support you?
 Ah, well, that's easy. We kind of already talked about Substack, but most importantly,
 what folks can do is just watch this channel. I already told you all --
 Subscribe and like.
 Pardon me?
 Subscribe and like, please.
 Subscribe and like, yes. Thank you. When you watch, please subscribe and like. But first
 and foremost, what we're trying to do is build on the movement here. And so my job is to
 create the highest quality content that I can. So if I am, hopefully you will watch
 it, but hopefully you'll also give me feedback in terms of how I can improve the quality
 here so that as we raise the quality, we reach even more people. So please watch and engage
 with me. Second is recommended. If you know people that might benefit from this content,
 family members, friends, relatives, workers, whomever, please share it liberally.
 And then third, to your point about subscribing, two ways you can help us by subscribing. One
 is if you're watching this channel and you haven't yet clicked the red subscribe button
 below, please do that now. Right now, while we're still early out of the gate, the more
 subscribers we have, the more the YouTube algorithm will score us more highly and the
 more it will share our content with other people. So that's a really easy, totally free
 way to help us out. Second, subscribe to my sub stack, and it's actually totally free
 to subscribe. But as I said, it's a way for me to keep you better informed of what's going
 on with the full movement here as we continue to develop more and more content and more
 and more solutions for folks. And then if you're really feeling generous, feel free
 to upgrade to the premium service there. And like I said, hopefully it doesn't feel like
 just an empty hat that I'm asking you to throw some money in. There'll be a value exchange
 there. But if you are so motivated, that is super helpful. The folks that have been subscribing
 to the premium service there have been helping me defray all the startup costs of launching
 this channel, of which there have been many. So yeah, so I think that's about it unless
 there are any other questions on the list we haven't touched yet, Lance.
 No, I think that's it. I'm glad you're back and glad we're doing this and I'm excited
 about some of the opportunities that you and I have talked about offline over the last
 few weeks about things that we can do in the future. So it should be very exciting.
 It should be. And that gets to a conversation that I had with Ted Oakley, which will air
 the week following this video, where I was asking him about what makes a rich life. And
 he works with high net worth clients and sees a lot of people who've been very successful
 financially. And some of them are incredibly successful, but some of them aren't. And so
 I was trying to dig into what makes the difference.
 And one of the things that he said was, he said, "I've seen a lot of people who make
 it big and then they don't turn around and reward or express their gratitude for the
 folks that help them get there." And he identified that as a real character shortcoming that
 he thinks prevents people from being happy. And the amazing thing about this transition
 has been the unbelievable amount of support and goodwill that I've gotten from so many
 different parties, certainly from the viewers, from key partners, from vendor, just everybody
 that's heard has been incredibly enthusiastic about this decision, cheering me on. But at
 the top of the list, Lance, I got to put you and the guys from New Harbor and the folks
 from Rocklink, the financial advisors, you guys were just incredibly supportive, have
 offered all sorts of different help that you had no need to offer, but you did out of just
 great generosity and partnership and friendship. And I chose the word steadfast for you at
 the beginning of this video because you have been a steadfast, I don't want to say partner,
 I just want to say friend through all this. And it's true, there is a lot that you and
 I have already talked about that we could be doing to add a huge plus to this movement
 here. And I'm super excited about what the future might bring there. But I do want to
 thank you personally and thank you publicly for all the support that you've given me and
 this whole new venture and its birthing here.
 Well, you're most welcome and always happy to do it.
 All right. Well, it speaks an awful lot to your character. All right. Well, look, in
 wrapping up, folks, normally I make the pitch here that everybody should be working with
 a professional financial advisor who understands all the issues that we talked about here.
 You should actually do that. I will definitely be continuing to make that pitch in the future.
 Normally I drive you to a form you can fill out to be connected with the advisors that
 Thoughtful Money will endorse. That all is getting put together right now still so that
 infrastructure is all being put together. So I'm not going to push you to a URL this
 video, but I will in the future. And I will definitely say, if you haven't yet talked
 to Lance's firm, you should just give those guys a call.
 In wrapping things up here, if you can help us out, like I said, click that subscribe
 button below, hit the like button. Both of those things are going to help the algo help
 this channel get to new heights more quickly. Again, if you haven't already gone and subscribed
 for free to my substack, please go do that now. That's just at adamtagert.substack.com.
 Lance, as usual, I'm going to let you have the last word, buddy.
 Yeah, and look, and to your point, realinvestmentadvice.com is our website. We have daily blogs, newsletters,
 so anything you need help with, you'll probably find help on the website. So again, Adam's
 point, if you need some help, we're happy to do it. There's a forum on the front that
 you can just ask a question and we answer every question every day. So we'll certainly
 take care of you.
 Alright, and folks, like I said, we got a lot of great content coming up here. The day
 after this video airs, we're going to have the one with Fred Hickey. Next week, we're
 going to have Jesse Felder, and we're going to have the debate between Matt Piepenburg
 and Brent Johnson, which I have finished recording. You're going to love that one, folks. But
 I mentioned several times in this video, the recent video I just did with David Rosenberg.
 Great discussion, really talks about what's most likely to happen from a macro standpoint
 next week to go watch that one. I'll put it up right here. With that, Lance, buddy, thanks
 so much for absolutely everything. Everybody else, thanks so much for watching.
 >> Thanks, everyone.
 >> Thanks, everybody.
 >> Thanks, everybody.
 [BLANK_AUDIO]
