 And something spooked the Fed, and they may be preparing so that, again, prepare for what
 lies ahead.
 Don't react to it too early because the Fed does not want to see a liquidity problem,
 and they will stay ahead of that.
 Welcome to Thoughtful Money.
 I'm its founder and your host, Adam Taggart, welcoming you back here at the end of the
 week for another weekly market recap with my absentee friend, Lance Roberts.
 He's actually not here this week, but we're very fortunate to have an upgrade.
 We have his partner there, his co-manager of the portfolio there, Michael Lebowitz.
 Michael, thanks so much for pinch hitting today.
 Oh, thanks for having me.
 Yeah, yeah, I shouldn't say pinch hitting.
 I feel like you're like the DH, like when we need a home run, we just bring you in off
 the bench.
 Lance hits the singles, doubles, and I just clean them up.
 Exactly.
 Exactly.
 You know how it's really works there at RIA.
 Exactly.
 Well, look, lots to talk about, and of course, this week sort of had a seismic event.
 We had the release of the FOMC latest guidance, and then we had Chair Powell give a press
 conference digging into the details of the Fed's outlook, and it really took people by
 surprise because it was a lot less hawkish, or maybe we say it was a lot more dovish than
 a lot of folks thought Powell was going to be, and of course, that ignited the markets
 to skyrocket from there.
 So when we were talking before we put the camera on, you said it caught you guys a little
 bit by surprise.
 I think you were in the majority.
 Tell us about your reaction to that and what implications you think it has.
 Well, two weeks ago, Powell and other Fed speakers said, "We're not even thinking about
 thinking about rate cuts."
 And then on Wednesday, two days ago, Powell said that they had a discussion about rate
 cuts, and they put out quarterly economic projections, and those quarterly economic
 projections show that when the Fed members vote, they expect at least three rate cuts
 next year, and the way Powell presented things during his press conference was also more
 dovish.
 I'm not going to say it's dovish, but it's clearly not as hawkish as he has been.
 So it was not expected at all.
 What's changed, especially over two weeks?
 Two weeks ago, they were telling us rate cuts are not being planned.
 We're not talking about that.
 Not even thinking about that, yeah.
 Not even thinking about thinking about thinking about it, and now they're talking about it,
 and the market reacted, kind of like it typically does when the Fed starts talking about cutting
 rates, but it kind of leaves a question, and there's a few potential answers.
 One is, and Lance and I have both said this before, the Fed is concerned about something.
 The Fed is concerned that there's a banking problem, a liquidity issue, maybe something
 foreign, and that they are concerned, and maybe they're trying to get a little bit ahead
 of it, not trying to shock the market if they have to cut rates much sooner than expected.
 Potentially Janet Yellen, or the president, gave them a tap on the shoulder.
 You're killing us with these high rates.
 For driving these deficits up to uncontrollable levels with high rates, you have to do something.
 I've seen a lot of talk about this being politically motivated, that Biden said, "You got to help
 me with the election.
 I'm not going to win an election with 5% Fed funds."
 I don't really put too much credence into that.
 First of all, Powell's a Republican, but I do think that they are somewhat independent,
 and I think it's also a little too early for Biden to be asking for help like that.
 Look, let's be frank, the unemployment rate is very low and the economy is doing well.
 You can make a case that Powell is actually helping Biden by providing savers with 5%
 plus investment rates, but the other one potentially tapping him on the shoulder are the banks.
 Remember, the banks own the Federal Reserve.
 When Jamie Dimon at JP Morgan and his colleagues go to Powell and say, "You're killing the
 banks," this crisis that we had last March is going to resurrect if you don't do something
 about this now.
 Something happened at the Fed.
 The Fed says they're data dependent.
 If you go back two weeks ago when the Fed said they're not thinking about rate cuts
 and look at every piece of data that's come out since then, there is nothing that warrants
 a change in tone.
 For the most part, data has been slightly stronger than expected.
 The employment rate, the CPI figures, the only thing a little weaker was PPI, which
 measures commodity and input prices, but there's nothing in any of that data that warrants
 such, I'm not going to say severe turn, but an unexpected turn of mindset of tone.
 All right, so a couple of things.
 First off, Powell was really surprisingly pleased with how things are.
 "Hey, they're going so well that we think we may be closing up shop a little bit early
 here in terms of the war room that we put together."
 And he did talk about how you don't want to wait until inflation gets down to 2% to start
 cutting.
 And that was a nod to the lag effect.
 He said, "Hey, if we wait until it gets down to 2%, we're going to have so much more lag
 effect coming that it's going to knock things much lower than we want them to.
 So we have to start somewhere above 2%," and he's kind of given the impression that, "Yeah,
 we think relatively soon, we're going to be at that point where we want to start rate
 cutting to try to slowly land the plane."
 Now, maybe not a huge shock to some people, but we had Powell's very sort of like, "Hey,
 everything's kind of Goldilocks and we feel really good and we might start cutting a little
 bit sooner.
 At least we're starting to talk about cutting."
 But then you had New York Fed President John Williams come out today and he said, and this
 is a quote, "We aren't really talking about rate cuts right now."
 He just said that on an interview this morning.
 So the markets are kind of a little bit like, "Whoa, wait a minute.
 We're getting two totally different messages here."
 And I think John Williams is, of the regional Fed presidents, he's the one whose voice has
 the most clout because the New York Fed is sort of the biggest dog in the constellation
 there.
 So the day we're talking here, markets are cooling off a little bit.
 Is this Williams playing bad cop to Powell's good cop here and is there a strategy behind
 that?
 So I saw the quote too.
 I haven't read his speech or whoever he was talking to, but that word really is interesting.
 We weren't really talking about rate cuts.
 What were you talking about?
 Because Powell said that there were numerous discussions on rate cuts.
 So they're almost like high school kids trying to hide something and you get different stories,
 but they're all kind of the same, so I don't know.
 Look, none of us know, but clearly the intention by Powell was to tell the market two things.
 The Fed's done raising rates and he didn't say that.
 He said there's still the potential.
 But again, if you look at those economic projections, not one member thinks rates will be higher
 this year or next year than they are now.
 So the Fed's pause, the pause is here to stay.
 So the logical question is, when's the next rate cut?
 And by the way, just a little history, since about 1955, there have been 13 increases in
 rates, like consecutive, not one off little moves, 13, 10 have ended in recession.
 Three of those, they lowered Fed funds and then raised them again into a recession.
 So to provide a little history on what a pause means, a pause usually precedes much lower
 Fed funds rates and interest rates and a recession.
 And you go back through history and what we've been through, the most recent increase in
 rates is among the most steepest and largest.
 So in terms of time and amount is one of the bigger ones.
 So if anything, the lag effect should be pretty significant when it does impact the economy.
 OK.
 And I've charted up a couple of times in recent past videos here on this channel, but this
 shows what you're talking about here, Michael, which is that when you look at the recessions
 we've had in recent memory going back into the early 90s, they have all been preceded
 by a pretty aggressive rise in interest rates and then a plateau or what's noted here in
 Rosenberg's chart here, a peak.
 And then the Fed starts cutting and really, if we look at, if we use history as our guide,
 the market should actually be really nervous when rate cuts start because that's usually
 the start of a pretty rough time, not just for the economy, but for stock markets as
 well.
 And I have a chart that I'll try to find for next time, which overlays the S&P over this,
 but you'll see that the S&P often corrects as the recession hits, and the Fed is scrambling
 to cut rates here.
 So history would show that this is the point where you really lighten up on a lot of financial
 assets.
 Market obviously is taking a different tack, at least at this point.
 So I wrote an article on this a couple of weeks ago, and I show what happens to stocks
 and bonds during the Fed cycle.
 And typically the Fed is raising rates to cool the economy down, to kind of make sure
 inflation doesn't get out of hand.
 So the stock market likes it.
 We got great growth, the Fed's just trying to moderate growth, everything's good.
 The Fed pauses and that's kind of a mixed period for stocks.
 Sometimes it's an up period, sometimes it's a down period.
 Then the Fed cuts.
 Now in more recent times, a Fed rate cut is considered great news.
 The Fed's lowering rates, they're going to boost the economy, all's good.
 They're going to do QE, it's going to flow right into the stock market.
 But historically, stocks do really poorly when the Fed is cutting rates through the
 whole rate cutting cycle.
 Doesn't mean they can't rally at the onset, but it's not good.
 Bonds on the other hand, yields tend to rise while they're increasing rates, and then they
 start falling during the plateau, during the pause, and then they really fall when the
 Fed is cutting rates.
 And so far, we've seen bonds.
 Bonds started rallying in early October.
 The Fed last raised rates, I believe it was July 31st.
 So this pause is starting to live up to other pauses.
 Stocks mix this time they're up, and bonds are down about a percent in the last two months.
 They've come down really quickly.
 Right.
 And just to be clear, not a percentage in price, you're talking about a full percentage
 in yield from 4% to 3%, meaning that's actually like a 25% decrease in the yield.
 Yeah.
 Right.
 And a big increase in prices depending, of course, what type of bond you own.
 So the takeaway from that article is that the pause is the time to plan, to think about
 what you're going to do, because this pause could last a while.
 And it could also be like 1995, you showed in that graph, where it proceeds kind of a
 Goldilocks economy.
 So it's not a period to just sell all your stocks, buy bonds, and just exit the market.
 It's a time to plan, to know what you're going to do, when and if the Fed starts cutting
 rates, because why are they cutting rates?
 There's probably a problem, and get ready for it.
 But it's not a time to overreact, because the Fed can pause for long periods of time,
 and the Fed could even cut rates marginally, which could benefit stocks if they don't go
 on an aggressive rate cutting campaign.
 And look, we all know that the last few years have been anything like any years that we
 have witnessed in our careers regarding the economy, regarding the Fed, regarding the
 markets.
 So just be prepared for anything.
 But when the Fed cuts rates, it's usually not a good thing.
 Okay.
 And I think that that's the thing to try to make people aware of, that you just don't
 get caught up in the FOMO and the current euphoria, where markets are just saying, "Oh,
 rate cuts sooner, everything is going to be awesome again."
 Right.
 Right.
 Okay.
 I still want to dig into many things here that you mentioned.
 You said that history shows that during that pause, it's where the momentum of everything
 that's happened up to that point is still carrying the action, even though the underlying
 force or thrust has gone.
 Think of a rocket that's been shot into space and then you cut off the engine, it's still
 going up for some period of time.
 So we could see the markets continue to rally here for some good period of time.
 I just want to note several people who have been on this channel who have been warning
 us that the markets could actually go higher into year end and into Q1.
 Your partner, Lance, had been one of them.
 He was telling folks to watch out in October for a potential upside surprise.
 We've certainly gotten that.
 I've talked with Darius Dale and we talked a lot about these past cycles and the analogy
 we came up with there is that the party tends to get craziest right before the cops show
 up.
 Right.
 So it shows that stocks oftentimes tend to really party right up until everything goes
 to some word I can't say without bleeping myself here.
 But basically, he has basically said, "Hey, I think stocks are going to go strong into
 Q1, maybe very early Q2 before there's some sort of reckoning."
 And then Felix Zulauf, who I just interviewed a week ago, and I know you know and respect
 Felix like pretty much everybody in the investing community.
 That's exactly his default script, as he said.
 He thinks the markets will go higher through Q1.
 He thinks the economy will actually look fairly robust to people.
 And Paul talked a fair amount about how the economy was coming into balance, but everything
 looked really good still.
 So we may hear a lot of that narrative.
 And then of course, at the start of Q2, that's when Felix thinks the wheels are going to
 come off.
 So who knows what will happen, but I just want to say that we've had a lot of historically
 informed people and analysts with good track records saying that this was something they
 expected.
 And it keeps playing out to script.
 And as you say, it kind of plays out to the script that history has shown us, even just
 looking at that chart that I pulled up a few minutes ago.
 So unless something changes, that would be a good default script to keep in mind and
 just ask yourself, if it does play out that way, how do I want to use this pause to plan?
 Right, right.
 Like Felix says, it could be second quarter, could be fourth quarter, could be 2025.
 The Fed may be able to kind of manufacture a Goldilocks economy for a year.
 We've seen, again, over the last three years, we've seen some strange things and we've seen
 some irregular consumer behaviors.
 Maybe they can continue to kind of carry the water and keep this economy going.
 The unemployment rate is still very low and it really, it's up ticked a little, but there's
 nothing concerning.
 So just on that point, and I'm trying to remember who I was talking with about it yesterday,
 but that was Axel Merck.
 But he sort of reaffirmed that the employment market tends to be one of those things that's
 fine until it isn't.
 It's generally not one of those things that you can kind of see trouble coming from quarters
 away.
 It tends to be like, oh, we're good.
 We're good.
 We're good.
 Oh my gosh.
 The unemployment's just spiked through the roof.
 So I just want to make sure that folks don't have the sense of like, well, I'll see trouble
 in employment coming from way off.
 It's oftentimes doesn't work that way.
 Right.
 Now it's also very important to talk about liquidity because at the end of the day, liquidity
 kind of drives the markets, right?
 We can talk about sentiment and narratives and all these other things, but liquidity
 is a key part of this conversation.
 And let's go back to 2019.
 The Fed had been raising rates for a couple of years slowly, nothing like what they're
 doing now, but they had raised it slowly.
 And then all of a sudden in, I believe it was like July of 2019, they cut rates three
 times.
 The economy was fine.
 There was nothing really in most people's kind of minds or even forecasts to warrant
 the Fed cutting rates at that point.
 So what was going on?
 There were liquidity problems with hedge funds.
 They apparently liquidity was running out.
 These hedge funds that had good collateral, treasury collateral, couldn't borrow money
 with that collateral.
 So there just was not enough money.
 The Fed cut rates three times and they did a QE with treasury bills, but regardless of
 whether it's treasury bills or 30 year bonds, it doesn't matter.
 It accomplishes something very similar.
 And we don't know how that story would have played out because the pandemic basically
 squashed the economy.
 They turned the economy off and the Fed cut rates to zero and you know the story from
 there.
 But the reason I bring that up is because the Fed has a reverse repurchase program.
 And the purpose...
 So I'm going to back up two steps here.
 Lance and I have talked about this on our podcast, but the Fed doesn't...
 The Fed has a Fed funds target.
 They don't set the target by decree.
 They don't say Fed funds are going to be five and a quarter, therefore Fed funds traded
 five and a quarter.
 They manage the Fed funds rate.
 So the Fed funds rate is the rate that banks trade amongst each other overnight money.
 So at the end of the day, Citibank says, "Oh, I'm short $4 billion."
 They call JP Morgan and JP Morgan, who has an excess of 4 billion, lends it to them overnight.
 The next morning, Citibank pays back JP Morgan.
 That's the rate that the Fed controls, that they manage.
 They manage it by injecting funds or taking funds out of the overnight borrowing markets.
 And they've done this forever.
 There's times where they're injecting a lot of money, times where they're pulling money
 out of the market.
 It gets particularly hairy at quarter ends and year ends when the Fed funds rate may
 be five and a quarter, but the effective rate or the weighted average rate could be 3% or
 8%.
 That happens all the time.
 But they do a very good job of getting the average or the effective Fed funds rate to
 be within pennies of their target.
 So there was excess liquidity in 2020, 2021, and the Fed has a repo repurchase program.
 What that does is banks, and they allow money market funds to do it more recently, lend
 money to the Fed.
 In exchange, the Fed gives them securities as collateral.
 Not that you really need collateral, but that's how it works.
 And it's for overnight.
 And these repo auctions happen every day.
 And I believe at its peak, they got up to, there was about 2.4, 2.2, somewhere in there
 trillion in these repo trades happening every night.
 So that's 2.2, let's call it 2.2 trillion of money.
 That's excess liquidity.
 That's money that it's not going to treasury bills because they're already saturated.
 It's not going into Fed funds.
 It has nowhere to go.
 And if that money didn't go into repo, the Fed funds rate would be much lower, would
 be below the Fed's target.
 Treasury bills would be below where the Fed would like to see them.
 So what we've seen recently is this reverse repurchase program dropping like a rock.
 It's now down just above 1 trillion.
 So that means excess liquidity is leaving the system.
 There's still a decent amount of it.
 And just explain why, what is triggering that substantial decrease?
 Why is the reverse repo program kind of getting drained?
 So if you look at it, the decline in the reverse repurchase rate happened at the same time
 the treasury bill rate went over the auction repo rate.
 That's telling you that the supply of US treasuries now is causing a pricing of US treasuries
 to be above that repo rate.
 So all these money market funds and banks are going into treasuries versus repo.
 It's just a higher yielding investment.
 And since about October or September, whenever this started, treasury bill yields have been
 higher than the repo yields.
 So again, this money is funneling towards treasury bills.
 This is a source of funding for the treasury.
 And the treasury is now essentially getting those funds.
 So when we talk about all this treasury issuance and how massive it is, there's a bank of
 money that still can buy treasuries.
 And a lot of what the treasury issues is very short term bills.
 And that's what's helped fund the treasury is money coming, excess liquidity coming out
 of reverse repurchase programs into the US treasury.
 Okay.
 And sorry to interrupt, but there are levers that the Fed can control, right?
 It doesn't sound to me like this is necessarily one of them or not one that directly controls.
 It sounds like market forces sort of shape what happens in the reverse repo where it's
 the participants are choosing a different alternative.
 Yes and no.
 The Fed can accept bids at repo.
 So they can basically determine how much repo happens every day.
 Okay.
 So they can limit it if they want to.
 They don't have to accept every bid.
 They set a rate.
 So they steer it.
 And they do many other things to inject money.
 They've always done QE is their SOMA account, something other marketable, I can't remember
 what it stands for, but they would buy and sell 10 year treasuries all the time.
 But it wasn't a coordinated effort like QE or QT to buy X amount every month.
 This was just one day they would buy 20 billion of treasuries.
 One day they'd sell 40 billion and back and forth to kind of manage the amount of money,
 the amount of liquidity in the system.
 So the point of bringing this up is that the amount of excess liquidity in the system is
 fading.
 That's kind of what happened in 2019.
 So as that reverse repurchase program gets closer to zero, we may start seeing stress
 in the banking system, the overnight markets, the money markets.
 And maybe that's what the Fed is worrying about.
 And that's what they're seeing.
 At the same time, the Fed's bailout the bank's latest program, BTFP, can't keep them all
 straight anymore.
 That ends in March.
 So that's another stress on the banks if the Fed doesn't renew it and the Fed may not want
 to renew it.
 And let's talk about what ending that means.
 What's great, Michael, is you're actually going down the list of questions that I have
 for you here.
 So I'm curious.
 There's a third one I have.
 Chris, you're going to bring up before I mention it to you.
 But real quick.
 So reverse repo, that's on a trajectory to get emptied by around Q2 of next year at the
 kind of current rate.
 Now that, again, it's not something the Fed is directly engineering.
 Like it's not saying we're trying to get this thing drained by a certain date the way that
 it does with say, QT, where they say, hey, we're definitely going to roll X amount off
 the balance sheet this month.
 So this thing could, we don't know with certainty when that's going to end because market forces
 might shift and all of a sudden maybe something happens with treasury yields that make them
 less compelling to the folks that are directing that.
 So there is some uncertainty with that.
 With the BTFP, that was basically, it's a one year loan, where the Fed is basically
 taking the impaired assets from the banks at par, compensating them at par for them,
 so that the banks are not in distress.
 What happens when your deadline is up?
 Depends what bond prices are.
 So if you think about a 30 year bond or a 30 year mortgage or a 30 year loan that that
 bank may have had, they may have, let's say in March it was 70 cents on the dollar.
 It may have dropped to 50 cents on the dollar when bond yields hit their highs.
 Well, maybe by March it's 80 or 90 cents on the dollar.
 So that potential stress is much less.
 So it in theory may have a little impact.
 It's a function of bond yields.
 So again, why would the Fed be essentially talking yields lower?
 That's one reason.
 They want to get rid of that program for whatever reason.
 It's not a very popular program.
 It's a popular among the banks, but it hasn't been that popular among Congress who's grilled
 him on it.
 So maybe he's trying to get rid of that program, but he knows he can't do it unless yields
 are lower and that impairment, temporary impairment because a lot of times they're treasury securities.
 It's not a permanent impairment, but that temporary impairment try to decrease as much
 as you can.
 All right.
 And again, just to sort of understand how that program works, let's say that rates were
 still at 5% and the deadline had come up and I'm the bank and I've got money that the Fed
 loaned to me or I've got the loan from the Fed, I've got to repay back, right?
 So I pay that loan back basically and then I get the impaired asset and then I'm still
 in maybe even worse trouble than I was back.
 Well, you're in big trouble, right?
 Because those are even more impaired if we're still at 5%, right?
 So to your point, the Fed may be trying to avert that crisis because could that maybe
 be a trigger that really creates a lot of weakness in the bank system?
 Oh, it absolutely will.
 If they didn't come with that program or some other program, the domino of banks would have
 kept falling.
 And remember, it's not just these banks that fell, it's that every other bank has counterparty
 exposure to those banks.
 So JP Morgan is on the hook, even if some bank, potentially on the hook, not necessarily,
 but if a bank in Iowa fails, JP Morgan may be lending them money or have some kind of
 other derivative agreement with that bank and then JP Morgan gets hit or Citibank or
 Bank of America.
 So this is what they learned in 2008.
 You can't let banking problems manifest themselves.
 It just creates problems.
 You saw this during the Great Depression too.
 You have to stop problems at the source.
 Yeah.
 And I'm guessing and love your opinion on this, but it's way more dangerous now because
 we've had this massive derivatives market that has grown into existence since the thirties
 where it's so large and it's so interconnected that literally nobody knows how interconnected
 it is.
 So it's like a crazy multi-jenga world where if you pull out this one little piece, you
 don't know what cascade of collapses you might be creating there.
 It's basically Powell's worst nightmare.
 Right.
 So there's a lot of offsetting derivatives, but they're not perfectly offsetting.
 So we may do a derivatives trade, me and you, and then we come back a week later and we
 do another one that's kind of in the opposite direction, similar, but a little different.
 So we can both say our net derivative exposure is zero or near zero, but those two bets are
 slightly different.
 And if you have a big dislocation in the market, even though they're somewhat similar, they
 can become very different.
 Long-term capital, for example, that's what they were doing.
 They were betting on historical relationships to come to fruition.
 And ultimately they will, but in certain periods of time, they can gravitate and the value
 of those two derivative trades that we did can be very different at a point in time when
 liquidity is needed and a derivatives contract has to be sold or extinguished.
 So no one knows how much exposure is out there and a lot of it is "netted", but it's not
 perfectly netted out.
 So it's a ticking, it's a time bomb.
 I'm not saying it's ticking, but it's certainly something that could be a problem.
 All right.
 Well, what I hear you saying is that go back in time in the way back machine to a month
 ago when yields were much higher than they are right now, so bond prices were lower.
 The Fed was probably looking at this upcoming deadline and saying, "Look, unless something
 changes, we've got a potential crisis on our hands."
 So this could be a reason for why Powell is trying to talk markets into a happier place.
 A number of people have asked since the surprise is what you were saying earlier, which is,
 is the Fed knows something it's not letting on?
 Is there something that's scaring it so much that it is thinking it's going to have to
 go into rescue mode sooner than would otherwise seem prudent?
 Who knows?
 But maybe this could be one of those things or maybe this is the thing.
 Right.
 And here's the thing.
 If you think you have to go into rescue mode in February, March, if you warn the markets
 now and you kind of stress it between now and then, when you actually do it, it's not
 a shock to the system.
 Let's just say the Fed cut rates 25 basis points on a Wednesday.
 That would have been a shock to the system.
 Who knows what would have happened?
 Bond yields probably would have dropped by half a percent.
 Scott only knows what would have happened to stocks.
 It probably would have been, it could have been 5% up, 10% down, who knows?
 But it would have been a shock to go from not even talking about rate cuts to two weeks
 later you're cutting rates.
 Why are you cutting rates?
 Something must be really bad.
 So they want to, in theory, again, we're just theorizing, we have no idea what's going on
 in their minds that they're trying to smooth the road over so that they do have to cut
 rates in the not too distant future.
 It's not a shock to the system.
 The Fed's really good at that, about warning the system, warning the markets before they
 kind of change their tact.
 Okay.
 So I pulled up a chart a little prematurely a few minutes back when you were talking.
 This is a liquidity chart that was published by your partner there, Lance.
 But it's put together by your organization, Real Investment Advice, and it is essentially
 tracking the S&P versus the liquidity index that you guys have been put together.
 I don't know everything that's in your liquidity index, but I know things that are driving
 liquidity these days are things like the BFTP, the reverse repo program that you talked about,
 obviously all the fiscal deficit spending that's been going on this year.
 And you can see here that market prices generally are pretty correlated with inflation.
 And Lance and I have talked about this at times, which is sort of like, are we kind
 of wasting our time talking about all these other macro and market factors and should
 we just be looking at where liquidity is going because that'll sort of tell us where things
 are headed.
 When liquidity rises, boats rise, tide falls, boat falls, and you can see here liquidity
 bottomed in October, which no huge surprises where the S&P bottomed.
 And it's been an upward trend since then.
 You're seeing the market now really kind of begin to get ahead of the liquidity surge.
 And I think in that blue arrow here at the end of the chart, Lance is raising some questions
 about there's a pullback need to happen just to sort of bring those things a little bit
 more into alignment.
 Of course, their trajectories should probably still be roughly the same.
 Liquidity going up, stocks going down.
 Let me just bring up one other chart and then I'll let you comment.
 There was a similar chart that I was sent by Sven Henrich, who was another one of these
 folks who was warning that stocks could run up into the end of the year.
 He was doing that from a purely technical basis, but he is now looking at the markets
 and just saying, my God, again, same question.
 Maybe liquidity is all that really matters.
 And you can see here liquidity flows have been net positive for certainly since the
 October worries that we had here and that really could just be explaining again.
 That's why we had one of the best Novembers on record for stocks and bonds.
 So you've raised a couple of important things about liquidity here.
 One would love just your reaction to the importance of liquidity in general, but it sounds like
 you're thinking that there might be certain events that could start to reduce liquidity
 next year, which if this correlation holds really well, would be a signal to say, hey,
 financial assets might not do so great when that liquidity starts declining.
 Right.
 Well, look, if the repo program keeps declining, that's pulling liquidity out of markets.
 The Fed intends to keep doing QT.
 That was that red on the last graph you showed.
 That continues to pull liquidity from the markets.
 So these are issues that, and the treasury is issuing a lot of debt, which pulls liquidity
 from the markets as well.
 So net-net, there's a draw on liquidity that's coming down the pike.
 And the question is, how much of that excess liquidity from the last few years still exists?
 And no one has a firm answer on that, but we know it's coming down and the Fed's trying
 to draw it down with QT, but it's being offset with other things.
 But at some point that excess liquidity goes away and quite possibly we're back to July
 2019.
 Okay, and this is something that Danielle and I were talking about last week, which
 is, we've been told that we've been in this tightening regime, right?
 And yes, truly quantitative tightening has been going on, they've decreased the balance
 sheet by more than a trillion, obviously interest rates have gone super high.
 And so we've been conditioned to think that this is tightening, but if you look at liquidity,
 at least over the past year, it's really been more like an easing regime.
 And so have we fooled ourselves with this tightening narrative that tightening is not
 so bad or whatever, maybe we're not as worried about tightening as we really should be.
 And what I hear Danielle saying, and you saying, because she was also talking about the reverse
 repo running out and the BTFP coming up for renewal, she says, once the net liquidity
 goes negative, then we're really going to feel what tightening feels like.
 We've been shielded from it by this easing cushion, but if that cushion gets removed,
 then we're really going to feel what tightening feels like.
 So do you think that there's a similar sort of reckoning like that coming next year?
 It's happening.
 We're getting there.
 Reckoning entails the Fed does nothing about that.
 And again, that's why I don't know what's going on at the Fed, but they look at this
 stuff clearly, and I wonder if they see that potential day of reckoning coming and they're
 saying, we need to get ahead of this.
 In July of 2019, we didn't get ahead of it and it bit us in the you know what.
 We had to cut rates three times for no apparent reason to the public.
 So let's get ahead of this now, whatever that means, and let's start thinking about programs
 that we can do to reintroduce liquidity and maybe avoid that reckoning, but we're certainly
 on a course for it, but at the same time that something spooked the Fed and they may be
 preparing so that, again, prepare for what lies ahead.
 Don't react to it too early because the Fed does not want to see a liquidity problem and
 they will stay ahead of that.
 I wonder, is the mandate of the system now to just always have it be positive net liquidity?
 Even when they say we're tightening, we're not really tightening in a net balance way
 like I was describing earlier, are we just in a world now where our central planners
 have just said, "Forget the liquidity cycle.
 We're just always going to have it be on."
 Yeah.
 Well, I just think maybe a question is, does the system require that now?
 It's either liquidity is net positive or it's in the process of falling apart.
 We have become way too dependent on debt and the Fed over time has become micromanager
 of the economy and like we said, it's all about liquidity and interest rates.
 If you can control interest rates and liquidity in a debt-driven economy, you control the
 economy and the Fed knows that and the economy is so structurally unbalanced with debt that
 they don't really have a choice in their minds.
 They can either let it collapse and clean up the system, but who wants to do that on
 their watch, let the next guy deal with that one or they can keep fine tuning it like volume
 on a radio to what they want and that's kind of what they think they can do.
 We know they can't, they've never had much luck with that, but they think they can lower
 rates a couple 25, 50 basis points and get the economy to ... It's like a plane.
 They use the analogy of a soft landing, but what does a plane pilot do?
 To take off, he's doing one thing to propel it, they pause and even while they're paused
 and they're doing things to keep it steady and then when you get ready to land, I'm not
 a pilot obviously, but you're doing things to land gently.
 Sometimes you're pulling up on a throttle, sometimes you're pulling back and that's how
 you get it to land.
 But if they're going in for a soft landing, they think they can just micromanage liquidity,
 interest rates, whatever it may be to accomplish a soft landing just like they accomplished
 extinguishing inflation.
 That's a very dangerous mindset that they have.
 Maybe 1995 they kind of got it right.
 Let's see if they can do it again, but history shows that most times they can't and it becomes
 ultimately very problematic for the markets.
 Yeah.
 Pilots have a huge array of instrumentation and tools and controls they can use where-
 That is correct.
 That is accurately measuring things going out there.
 Right.
 Correct instrumentation.
 Yes, you're right.
 Feds tools and all of our tools, economic data is poor.
 It's very hard to really gather correct economic data.
 It's very easy to pick out the flaws in these big data sets, CPI.
 They're using housing shelter data that's almost a year old.
 We know that they use energy prices from three months ago and we're getting about-
 Right.
 They had the decrease in healthcare contribution by like 30% or something like that.
 No human living in America saw their health insurance decrease period, let alone by that
 amount.
 Right.
 You're on the West Coast, I'm on the East Coast.
 It's a huge price of milk and do you consume more than me or less?
 It's throw that to all 50 states and it's impossible to calculate to begin with and
 then you have to make all these assumptions and time lags because of data and it's just
 incredibly impossible.
 They're looking out the window of a foggy environment and their gauges are about close
 to right.
 Some are better than others.
 That's what they're dealing with.
 The fuel gauge is telling you what the fuel was a quarter ago, right?
 It's also very dynamic.
 It's like the weather.
 The seven day forecast often proved wrong because the weather is dynamic.
 It changes.
 It affects change in itself.
 That's like the economy.
 Everything's good but if I go out tonight to dinner with a couple of friends and I found
 out one got laid off and the other is worried that he's not going to get a raise or the
 guy next to him lost his job, I may say, "You know what?
 We're not going to go out next Tuesday night.
 Let's just pull back a little bit."
 That kind of scared me.
 The economy feeds on itself too, positively and negatively.
 That's why employment is so vital to follow because at the end of the day, that's what
 drives consumption.
 It's how good do you feel in your job with both how much money you're making and will
 you be employed in two weeks or a month?
 All right.
 I do want to talk a little bit more with you about your outlook for jobs for next year,
 but just to continue this analogy for a second.
 We've got the Fed who's looking through a foggy window.
 They've got wonky instrumentation, imperfect instrumentation.
 Let's say they've got some loud people banging on the cockpit door telling them how they
 think they should fly the plane, whether the pilot is truly independent or not, he's got
 some pressure back there.
 But their controls are pretty crude.
 They've got basically asset purchasing or selling, and they've got the Fed funds rate.
 That's pretty much what they've got to command and control the whole economy here.
 Then my question is, "All right, so let's go back to the pilot's record of finessing
 his landings."
 How many examples do we have of the Fed surgically engineering a painless Goldilocks scenario
 here?
 Right.
 Back to our initial lance hitting singles and doubles, they're hitting below the Mendoza
 line.
 They don't have a good record.
 Yeah.
 In other words, it's just like if our best bet is placing our hopes that they just totally
 finesse this thing, we're not in a good place.
 History suggests it's probably not going to work out the way that we want.
 Right.
 Back to your point about planning.
 Planning.
 Get ahead of this.
 Understand what the potential ramifications are.
 Doesn't mean do anything today.
 I don't think there's anything to do today, but know what you will do, what you will sell,
 what you will buy, how you will hedge, what kind of risk you're comfortable with and what
 to look for to know when that day may be upon us.
 I'm going to ask you those questions actually, and I want to get quickly to how this week's
 developments may have, if at all, impacted your outlook for bonds going forward because
 bonds has been a topic of great interest on this program of late and you are one of our
 top bond experts.
 I want to get to that in a second.
 There's one more, I'm trying to determine if I call it liquidity or if I just call it
 a funds flow that might be material to the markets, but now that bond yields are coming
 down and may continue to come down from here, there's now I believe 6 trillion that has
 left the banking system for money market funds or anywhere from money market funds.
 That's because rates have gone up so extremely and people could get a really good return
 or really no risk.
 As bond yields start to come down, people are thinking, well, that money might start
 beginning to leave money market funds trying to find a better yield, better relative yield,
 especially if the market starts taking off again here and people start getting the narrative
 of like, oh, okay, Powell just gave the green light that the pivot is here, the Fed put
 still alive and let's jump back in the markets before they melt up to crazy new highs from
 here.
 How material a factor do you think this could be, this huge amount of capital that has sloshed
 into money market funds this year, maybe now sloshing back into the markets?
 That doesn't necessarily concern me because that's coming from banks.
 It went from banks to the money market funds.
 I think the concern is for the Fed that it doesn't go back to the banks.
 Why would it if- Well, eventually rates come down and the banks
 are more competitive and honestly at the same rate, I'd rather have my money at the bank.
 That's where all my monetary operations occur.
 It's easier to keep it there than to have to move it back and forth between a broker
 and a bank.
 Well, let me just ask this because you could very well be right, but I'm wondering if this
 is a little bit sort of like the work from home movement that COVID really broke open
 where once people have got a taste of what working from home is like, there's a huge
 percentage even with the return to office that are going to stay working much higher
 than before.
 Now that people have kind of learned how to move their money out of a bank through a money
 market fund or even into T-Bills directly through Treasury Direct, if it's your savings,
 why would you keep it in a bank?
 Because the bank is generally always worse than the other alternatives, at least speaking
 for say the past decade, the banks have been insultingly low in what they would take.
 No, you're correct.
 I think there is a permanent amount of funds that have left the banks and that's a problem
 for the banks because the banks use those deposits to make loans and that's money creation.
 As long as that money market, that money stays away from the banks and can't make loans,
 that is an issue for the banks.
 I don't disagree with you.
 I think we have all learned that there are alternatives.
 Right.
 Could that money, I mean, I know it's not net new liquidity-
 But here's the question, Adam.
 You take money out of the money market fund to buy IBM.
 Who are you buying it from?
 Buy it from me?
 Well, you're buying from whoever has IBM.
 Buying from whoever and now they have cash.
 What are they going to do with it?
 It's going right back to the money market fund.
 Okay.
 I guess my question more on this is, could this be another factor that could be juicing
 asset prices higher?
 On the margin, but again, the money will just leave the money market fund and come right
 back because you have to buy it from someone.
 This whole cash on the sidelines thing is kind of bunk.
 I totally agree with that.
 I'm just wondering if I'm saying, "Okay, look, I've been getting 5% and now it looks like
 it's going to three or lower.
 I want to put it somewhere else.
 Maybe some of it I'll still keep here because it's better than the bank, but some of this
 I want to start trying to get a higher return.
 Oh, IBM looks good.
 Now I'm the marginal buyer of an IBM share of stock and I'm willing to pay a little bit
 more to get it from this guy."
 Could this be a factor that keeps asset prices more elevated for a longer period of time?
 If you're more motivated to buy than the seller is to sell, yes, because you're then driving
 the price of the stock.
 So, yes-
 Well, 6 trillion is a lot.
 Right.
 If there's-
 Not that it's all going to come out, but-
 Right.
 Right.
 If the market gets into a frenzy, yes, it can drive prices higher, but again, ultimately,
 you're going to pull the money out and I'm going to put the money right back into the
 money market fund.
 So, it's just a question of motivation and who's more motivated to buy or sell and kind
 of set that price level.
 Okay.
 So, we kind of get from you is you don't think it's as big as a factor of some of the things
 we talked about, except if the market gets whipped into a massive FOMO frenzy, this could
 be something that adds a little bit of rocket fuel to it.
 Right.
 Right.
 And that's true for bonds too.
 Right now, money markets yield what, five and a quarter, five and a half?
 Bonds yield roughly 4%, right?
 So, the question though that bondholders have is, "Well, that's great that I can get five
 whatever percent for a month, for three months, but am I going to be able to get it for six
 months or a year if the Fed's cutting rates?"
 And that's why we're seeing some of this frenzy into the bond market.
 You know what, I'd rather lock in 4% for 10 years than 5% for two months and what looks
 like it'll be 4% for the next year.
 All right.
 So, you're taking it to where I wanted to take it on bonds.
 So, why don't we go into bonds right now?
 I want to know if what happened impacted your theory, but let me pull up a chart or two
 here from Alf Pecatiello, who I interviewed earlier this week, who you know is a bond
 analyst.
 He has a theory that's pretty similar to what you just talked about there, Michael, and
 he has another element he adds to it, which is here is a chart of his, which basically
 says that when inflation gets high enough, it seems here roughly above 4%, bonds start
 losing their negative correlation with stocks, and so they become less attractive to hold
 by an institution that's looking for negative correlations to have a well-diversified portfolio.
 And then when inflation starts going lower, that negative correlation starts kicking back
 in.
 So, he combines this with the point you just made, Michael, which is that you have a lot
 of these whales, basically the non-banks that are out there, the pension funds, the insurance
 funds, those big companies that have been challenged with bonds of late because of that
 negative correlation, who are all of a sudden now saying, "Oh, hey, wait, no, this is going
 to give us the ballast that we want again, and rates have been really high, they might
 start going lower.
 This is the time for me to lock all this stuff in.
 I can lock in the highest rate on bonds that are available right now with more confidence
 that they're going to be negatively correlated to stocks going forward.
 So he thinks there's a potential real massive influx of whale buying into the bond market.
 What do you think about that theory?
 I agree 100%.
 So when you think about what's driving bonds, everyone talks about there's a huge short
 base among the hedge funds and the CTAs, and they have to cover.
 Yes, we know that from the COT statistics that are put out, and yes, that's been happening,
 I presume, that the shorts have been covering.
 But what is less appreciated is that most people just don't own enough bonds.
 Bonds were 2% or lower for a long period of time.
 Why own them?
 And then all of a sudden, bond prices are going down, yields going up.
 It's like, "I don't need those.
 Why do I need those?"
 And now all of a sudden you can get four or 5% in a bond, and you're thinking about stock
 returns that are on average over time, 6%, 7%, there's a reason to look at bonds again.
 And you can lock in, we were saying this two months ago, you can lock in five plus percent
 for 10 or 30 years.
 Bonds trade off of inflation.
 At the end of the day, bonds and inflation, and inflation expectations are extremely correlated.
 And I did that in a recent article, I did a scatter plot of that in a Kiss Bonds article,
 and keep it simple, stupid, not calling you stupid, Adam.
 It's all right, my friend.
 But the bottom line is, have an expectation for inflation where it's going to go.
 And from that, that should in the longer run help you understand where bonds are going
 to go.
 In the short run, narratives can cause deviations between relationships.
 And I think what we're seeing now is that people are realizing that the Fed's doing
 their victory lap, but the victory lap means that inflation is going back to 2%.
 And if inflation is, there's the graph.
 And it's small, so I can't see it.
 Yeah, I'm sorry, I can't make it any bigger than this, but basically, this shows the correlation
 of inflation expectations and treasury yields.
 So super tightly correlated.
 So you're saying if folks are expecting inflation to go down, then obviously, given this very
 direct correlation, you would expect treasury yields to come back down too, which means
 treasury prices would go up.
 Right, right.
 So I've used the example of CalPERS, the biggest pension fund in America, maybe the world.
 They have a mandate to return, I think it's 7%, 6.5%.
 Buy 30-year treasuries and lock it in at 5%, sprinkle around some higher yielding stuff
 around it and your job's done for 30 years, risk-free.
 It's not hard.
 You have just saved the pension funds if they are willing to just buy some treasuries.
 Their pension funds were in trouble, all of a sudden you've offered them a bailout with
 these higher yields.
 Then you've got insurance companies and endowment funds and all kinds of other institutional
 money that is not just trying to get the best return possible.
 They need steady, predictable returns because they have money going out the other side.
 So you have an incredible amount of institutional and retail investors that just didn't have
 a lot of bonds that now are saying, "I better buy bonds before they're back at half a percent
 or 1%."
 That's just fueling the market and you see it.
 This morning, bonds traded down about half a point.
 They were up when we went on the show.
 You're just seeing anytime there's a slight dip, it's FOMO.
 They're buying the bonds.
 They're a little bit overdone right now.
 They've just gone too far, too fast without any kind of break.
 But I think what it's really showing you is that the world is short bonds, whether actually
 short or just don't own enough, that there's just this big influx of bond buyers.
 And I was just going to say, this was one of our problems with owning bonds is that
 we suspected that when people started buying bonds, that rate would drop so quickly.
 That's hard to get on that train.
 You got to get on that train while it's a little painful to be on the train.
 So you have been very consistent this year about how attractive you thought bonds were.
 And bonds were, the US Treasury had kissed, the 10-year Treasury kissed 5%.
 You and Lance were definitely ringing the bell.
 I guess a big question viewers have right now is, okay, right now, when you and I are
 talking, it looks like the 10-year yield is about 3.9%, Michael.
 So the first question folks are going to ask is, oh my gosh, did I just miss the opportunity
 here?
 What's your response?
 I don't think so.
 I mean, yeah, you missed.
 I'm not sure we go back to 5% again, but again, I think they're a little overdone here in
 the short run.
 They've gone very far.
 Many of our technical indicators are just grossly, if you're looking at price, grossly
 overbought.
 So I do suspect there's some sort of pullback.
 The problem with waiting on a pullback if you don't own any bonds is that maybe they
 drop to 360 and then we get the pullback or consolidation and it pulls back to 380.
 Maybe it pulls back starting tomorrow or Monday and we get back to four and a quarter, 410.
 But right now the Fed's telling you that inflation is tame.
 The data is telling you that inflation is tame.
 It's not back down at a Fed's 2% target, but still getting paid 4%.
 If you're in a two and a half or 3% inflation area, it still makes bonds cheap.
 So I'd say if you don't own any, you should think about owning some now, but just be prepared
 that you could lose a little bit here in the short run as yields will probably go back
 up again for a couple of weeks and relieve the market of that overboughtness.
 And viewers of this channel are very familiar with the short term overbought, short term
 oversold.
 Lance and I talk about it every week in relation to stocks and bonds.
 So you guys think that they're the short term overbought here.
 No big surprise, given that the Fed basically just said game on for bonds.
 So I'm going to ask you to speculate here, Michael.
 So nobody has a crystal ball, I'm not going to hold you to this.
 Assuming there's no recession next year, we're currently at 3.9.
 Maybe you think it could go up to 4.1, 4.2, whatever.
 Where do you think, given this whale buying and just the dynamics we've talked about,
 where do you think rates could go?
 What's a rate the year could end at that wouldn't shock you?
 So if we just kind of -- let's go with the Goldilocks scenario.
 Goldilocks scenario means inflation is probably somewhere between 2.5%.
 Growth is not what it was last quarter at 5-something percent.
 It's probably 2.5% as well.
 When the economy's humming along, unemployment's up a little, but there are really no big issues.
 There's no liquidity issues.
 I would say yields are probably 3 to 3.5%.
 If the Fed inadvertently starts cutting rates too soon and inflation fears and then inflation
 spike, yields can go right back up again.
 And conversely, if the Fed's starting to cut or starting to talk about cutting because
 there's a big problem on the horizon, yields can go to near zero.
 In 2020, the 10-year was below half a percent.
 So those are kind of your three outlooks.
 And depending whether you want the bearish economy outlook, Goldilocks, or the Fed's
 going to rekindle inflation, from a bond perspective, though, let's just say the market fears inflation
 again.
 Bond yields go back to 5%.
 That's going to dampen the economy.
 So it's almost self-reinforcing that higher yields will then beget lower yields.
 But it's painful to go from 4 to 5 if you hold bonds.
 Right.
 To your point, if you got caught flat-footed by that, then, of course, the big question
 would be-- and it would depend on how long dated the bonds you're holding on to is, do
 you hold through that or do you cut bait?
 Right.
 All right.
 So it's interesting because you said that if yields go back up, obviously, that weighs
 in the economy and will slow the economy.
 Yields have been high for a long time.
 And guys like you and I and Lance, we all talk about the lag effect.
 And we think that there could be plenty of lag effect still in the system to slow the
 economy maybe more than the Fed would like, even if the Fed starts cutting sooner than
 later.
 I guess we'll find out.
 I'm just curious, not going to hold you to this, but bullish, Goldilocks, bearish, what's
 your personal expectation?
 Somewhere between--
 I know you get a position for all of them, but what's--
 Somewhere between Goldilocks and bearish.
 But I think we can be in this nice area for a while.
 This economy is extremely resilient.
 And I think we could be in these Goldilocks for another three, six, nine months.
 So if you're kind of betting, if you're bearish and betting against this market, just be careful.
 And this is where technicals really help us a lot.
 When we're kind of more undecided about what's going on in the world, technicals can help
 steer us and let us know if we need to relieve ourselves of some stocks or even add some
 stocks.
 Right?
 So we're pretty bullish in October.
 And regardless of what we thought about the economy or the macro environment, that was
 a good time to buy stocks.
 So when those technicals turn in, stocks too are very overbought right now.
 So we do think they're going to take a breather as well.
 But we're approaching a percent or two from all-time highs, which is bullish.
 So we may just see stocks run into next year and we'll take it as it comes.
 Well, and I was going to ask about that because Lance has been talking about the overbought
 nature of stocks for a couple of weeks now.
 And then, of course, everything just leapt a lot higher after the Fed announcement.
 So I'll dig into this more deeply with Lance next week.
 We'll pull up the charts and we'll go through the technicals.
 But yeah, I was going to ask you, did that just make things more overbought and a pullback
 even more likely or did it punch through resistance and then now it's game on?
 They punched through resistance.
 So it's still overbought.
 And maybe what we'll have to relieve the overboughtness is just a period of consolidation where we
 go nowhere for a month or two versus falling 3%, 5%, 6%, 7%.
 That may be how it relieves itself if the market and sentiment really believes that
 the Fed is going to cut rates, especially what makes the rate cuts so bullish right
 now is that there's no reason behind it.
 If the Fed said we're thinking about cutting rates because the banks are collapsing, market
 would have dropped 10% Wednesday.
 They didn't tell you why.
 We don't know why.
 All we can do is speculate and everyone is speculating.
 It's because we're in a Goldilocks scenario.
 Why wouldn't they do that?
 And hopefully they're right.
 Yeah, and as we've talked about, Powell would never say we're cutting rates because we think
 a recession is about to unfold because if it did, everybody would freak out and that
 would become self-fulfilling for the recession.
 Right, exactly.
 So again, that's why we just got to closely follow the Fed, closely follow things like
 employment and other economic data and just see if there's a turning point.
 We're also normalizing.
 We've had a very strong economy.
 So the economic growth rate is going to decline.
 Whether we're going to Goldilocks or whether we're going into the greatest depression ever,
 you have to go from a very robust economy to a normal economy to wherever, to Goldilocks
 or to the depression or any point in between.
 But part of landing a plane is you have to go from 20,000 feet to 10,000 feet to zero.
 So you're always going to be at some point in that cycle where it's, okay, good, we're
 back to normal.
 Right, right, exactly.
 And as David Rosenberg likes to warn, every hard landing, you have to go through the soft
 landing to get to the hard landing.
 Yes.
 All right, well, look, we're beginning to run short on time here.
 So let me get first to trades.
 Talking to Lance, a lot of the last couple of weeks, you guys hadn't really made that
 many trades because you were sort of waiting to see how the market was going to, what was
 going to happen with the overbought condition.
 I think last week he mentioned there were several little trades that you guys might
 have done.
 Did you do anything over the past week?
 So we didn't, but today we did.
 About an hour before coming on your show, we bought a FANG energy stock.
 We like the energy sector.
 We think at least for the short period here, crude oil.
 Okay.
 Did you say you bought the FANGs and energy?
 No, FANG.
 It's an energy stock.
 I'm sorry.
 Okay.
 So FANG is the name of an energy stock.
 You did not buy a FANG stock.
 Okay.
 Right, right, right.
 Not the FANG stocks.
 The technical setup for oil looks decent here for the next few months.
 It also is somewhat of an inflation hedge.
 Not that we're that worried about inflation, but if what Powell did sparks a little bit
 of the inflation expectations to rise, there's only a few ways to hedge inflation that people
 typically use.
 Right?
 It's gold, it's oil, and it's tips.
 So you might get a little benefit from there and it's a nice position in our portfolio.
 We also look at it in the structure of the whole portfolio.
 So it's a little bit of a hedge within a portfolio, but we do think a hedge that will work because
 the technicals are very strong right now.
 Okay.
 You mentioned actually tips.
 What are your thoughts on tips right now?
 I still think inflation is coming down.
 So I think it's a time if you don't know what tips are, now's the time to learn about tips,
 to learn how they operate.
 They're very unique.
 It's a good time to kind of figure them out, figure out what type of tip you'd want to
 buy for what type of circumstance, but right now I think inflation is coming down.
 If we go into a recession, it's going to come down sharply, but I think at some point the
 Fed and the government react to a recession in a very inflationary way, and that's the
 time to buy tips.
 We own tips in '21.
 We bought a security called STIP.
 It's short-term tips, and even though it was a short-term security, I think we made six,
 seven percent on it in a matter of a month or two.
 So again, there's a right time to buy tips, but I think for now the inflation narrative
 is that inflation is under control and not really creeping higher.
 Okay.
 So there's a lot of people, Zulav, just the most recent I talked to, who think like you,
 the likely path here is that the Fed fights slowdown in the economy here.
 The slowdown gets ahead of the Fed, and then the Fed has to go into full-blown rescue mode
 and we go back to easing and all the four-letter, TARP stealths and all those types of programs,
 and the rest of the world's doing the same thing at the same time, and we get a ton of
 inflation out of that.
 We also get a massive spike in asset prices on a nominal basis, but it sounds like you're
 saying the time to buy tips is ideally right before you think that's going to happen, right,
 when tips are out of favor but well-positioned for what you think is coming.
 When inflation is very low, yes.
 So presumably, if you guys feel like we're entering that state, Lance or we'll have you
 back on will tell us that you're finding them attractive and starting to nibble in, and
 we'll let this audience know when you guys think the time is right.
 Yeah, and the other thing that's important to remember that 2020, '21 on the inflation
 side were very different than what we've been through in the last 30 years.
 They shut down the supply lines.
 The whole supply side of supply and demand, supply lines were shut down because of COVID.
 That's not, never say never, but that's not going to happen this next time, and that's
 a huge factor, and I think the Fed doesn't understand, I don't think anyone truly understands
 how much of inflation was monetary and fiscal and how much was just the supply side, and
 if it turns out that it was a large percentage of the supply side and not monetary and fiscal,
 then even if the Fed and the government start really pushing on the gas, it may not be nearly
 as inflationary as what the market may think based on 2020, 2021, '22.
 So that's just something to keep in mind too.
 Yeah, that is a really good point, which is, yeah.
 We had a massive factor that we will probably very likely not have the next time around
 if the Fed is forced to-
 And we also had consumer behaviors were screwed up and they wanted to reward themselves.
 That's not typical in a recession.
 They spent a lot of money on things they wouldn't have spent money on typically.
 That is true.
 Kind of the other side of that-
 So the demand side got screwed up.
 Yeah.
 The other side of that coin, and of course, since you had such a lack of supply too, you
 had two wicked imbalances, a lot more demand, a lot less supply.
 The other side of that coin though, is we have up until now, up until the pandemic,
 we had largely gone into rescue mode from the monetary side.
 This was the first time that we did anything like direct payments to households or all
 these forbearance programs and stuff like that.
 And now that consumers have gotten the taste of it and politicians have gotten the taste
 of how much consumers like it, that playbook's likely going to be deployed again and maybe
 even deployed to a bigger extent, because we did it this way once, let's just do more
 of it.
 That's QE.
 QE was a one-time tool that they're not going to use again.
 That's what we were told in 2008.
 And here we are.
 They've been doing QE for non-crisis events ever since then.
 So I think you're right.
 That's my biggest fear is that that playbook has been written and now they will keep expanding
 on it.
 All right.
 Well, look, a number of other topics I wanted to get to with you that we're not going to
 be able to get to, but let me start to wrap up with, there's a question that I've started
 asking guests on this channel and the audience seems to really like it.
 So since we get you this week, I want to ask you to view, which is we've been talking about
 money and financial investments for this past hour and 15 minutes.
 What's a non-financial, non-monetary investment that you would encourage people to consider
 investing in right now?
 And just to give you an example, I've had some people talk about health and fitness.
 I've had some people talk about work on your communication skills.
 Somebody suggested taking a sales course or getting some exposure to sales that just sort
 of gives you these lifelong skills that you'll benefit from in all aspects of your life.
 I've had some really great ideas that I wouldn't have expected, but they were great.
 So I'm curious, is there anything that pops into your mind as a life skill or a behavior
 or anything that you would encourage people to lean into that's not just monetary related?
 Put your phone away, especially when you're off of work.
 Disconnect.
 Exercise.
 Do things that you don't.
 Don't get caught in ruts, be social.
 It's important to be around other people.
 They've proven that mentally, physically.
 Just take care of yourself and don't stress yourself over the markets and over what you
 think may happen.
 It's very easy to fall into these bullish and bearish camps that can be very stressing.
 And the Uber bulls, it's just as stressful as the Uber bears.
 The world coming to an end versus the world booming from the investment side is very stressful.
 So try to separate yourself and just be level headed.
 And I read a lot of articles from people I don't agree with at all.
 And I do that because it either points something out that I hadn't thought about or it strengthens
 my conviction on something.
 So just be nice to everyone.
 This world is pretty crappy right now.
 Just be nice.
 Talk to people.
 All right.
 Well, that was great.
 It was all good.
 It was a lot of different things.
 And I could talk at length about, I think, any one of them with you.
 I want to underscore one part that you talked about, which was disconnect from the technology
 and be social.
 At our core, we are social creatures.
 It's just how we evolved.
 We evolved to live in tribal units.
 And there's a great book, which, folks, I'm going to give a quick little anecdote.
 And if you want me to bring this guy on, let me know in the comment section below.
 It's not monetary related.
 But if you remember the movie or the book, The Perfect Storm, Michael, the guy who wrote
 is an investigative journalist named Sebastian Junger.
 Really good guy.
 Really fascinating guy.
 He ended up writing a book called, well, he wrote a book called War, where he was embedded
 with a US platoon in Afghanistan in a hot zone there.
 He was there for, I think, 14 months with these guys.
 He wrote a book called War about that experience.
 But he then followed it up with a book called Tribe.
 And the reason why he wrote it down, you should write it down.
 This is a really cool book.
 It's a short book.
 You can read it on an airplane ride.
 The reason why he wrote Tribe is he was sitting in Germany with the commander of the platoon
 and a few other people getting ready to fly back to the States.
 And he was talking with the commander.
 And the commander said, look, we hated it here.
 I mean, let me just be honest about it.
 We're all young guys.
 There's nothing here that we like.
 Our wives aren't here.
 Our girlfriends aren't here.
 There's no video games.
 There's no alcohol.
 It's like 120 degrees in the shade.
 People are shooting at us.
 It's just miserable.
 We all just dreamed about going home.
 But I'll tell you, if there was a helicopter fueled up ready to take us back, we'd go to
 a man.
 And Sebastian was really struck by that, like, wow, what is it that would make somebody who
 hates that place so much be willing to go back when they've got what they want right
 in sight?
 They're just about to go home with their families.
 And then he watched the troubles that these guys largely had kind of reintegrating once
 they got back.
 And he said, it's not the PTSD said, you know, the army kind of knows how to generally deal
 with that.
 He said what it was is that people just felt so disconnected.
 They were in an environment that was very, very real, and then went to one that felt
 very, very artificial, superficial, fake.
 And what he kind of came to realize through his investigations in the book was that humans
 evolved in these tribal units.
 So that's what a platoon was or as a relatively small group of where everybody knew everybody.
 Everybody had a purpose.
 Everybody had a role to serve.
 And the way in which humans evolved is it was basically you versus the world, right?
 Whether it was the elements, whether it was predators, whether it was other tribes who
 were going to come in and steal your stuff.
 There was a lot of adversity that you guys communally had to pull together to face every
 day.
 And everybody had a role and everybody had to trust everybody.
 Everybody had everybody's back.
 And he said, you know, in these units, he's like, you might hate the guy who's on watch
 with you personally, but you take a bullet for him because you know he would take a bullet
 for you.
 And so it's that sort of vivid aliveness where he's like, crazily enough, like war military
 situations.
 Like that's where humans are kind of living the most the way that we were designed to.
 And he actually found lots of other parables.
 Like he said, the Peace Corps is very similar where people are working in a small village
 to build a bridge or whatever, right?
 You have that same sort of experience and they have that same sort of reentry problem
 where you come back to the States and you ask anybody something and you just get the
 superficial, oh, fine, oh, you know, it's good.
 And people smile, but they don't treat you like they care about you.
 And then you're back in your home and there's nobody around and you get sucked into your
 devices and you just feel this lack of being connected to living.
 So anyways, I just wanted to underscore that point about disconnect and reconnect with
 other people, because literally that is how we are wired and there's some really interesting
 elements in Sebastian's book where he interviews a lot of different people in a lot of different
 situations.
 And one is people who lived in Beirut.
 And he was a totally war torn country at one point.
 It's put itself back together now.
 And we went and talked to people who lived through the war.
 They would say, you know what?
 Nobody like admits it publicly, but like we all kind of miss the war because all the social
 class barriers went down.
 We all pulled together.
 We all worked together.
 Once it was over, those barriers came back up and we're just a lot less nice to each
 other.
 And yes, it's great not to be worrying about dying in a missile attack or whatever.
 So I don't want to minimize that, but it's really about sort of what makes life fulfilling
 and meaning.
 A lot of that gets drained away the more disconnected we are.
 So I want to thank you for bringing that point up.
 Okay.
 Good.
 All right, folks.
 So just in wrapping up on that, sort of a related point to the importance of social
 relationships, a little bit of sad news to share, and I'm sharing it because I may end
 up having to take a day or two or more next week off from recording.
 Or if I do record, you might see me in a different background.
 Folks may remember that my mother passed away earlier this year.
 Sadly, my father is in the hospital.
 Things aren't looking good.
 It's looking like I'm probably going to have to fly back home over the weekend to likely
 say goodbye.
 So I'll be doing that, been a hell of a year.
 Still hoping for some sort of 11th hour miracle here, but I just wanted to let folks know
 in case indeed you don't see me next week.
 And the last thing I'll just sort of note about that related to what we were talking
 about here, Michael, is losing family members, losing people who are close to you, totally
 forces you to think about life in different ways.
 And one of the things I'm thinking a lot about is a comment.
 I think it was made by Maya Angelou, but it makes you evaluate how you want to be for
 the people that are in your life that you're in close connection with.
 And her quote was, "People don't really remember what you do or what you do for them.
 They remember how you made them feel."
 And that's something I'm spending a lot of time right now just trying to think about,
 okay, how do I want to take that type of attitude forward from here going through all this?
 So I'm sure Lance and I will riff on that at some point next week in one of these rants
 we do at the end of these videos.
 All right, folks, well, sorry to drop that on you, but again, that may explain if I'm
 absent next week.
 If you've enjoyed this conversation with Michael, we'd love to have him come back on this channel
 whenever Lance can't make it, or maybe sometimes we'll just shove Lance aside anyways and have
 Michael here.
 Let him know your love for that by hitting the like button and then clicking on the red
 subscribe button below.
 A reminder that our subscriber count or growth in our subscriber count really does matter
 while we're still a new channel like this.
 That's what gets the attention of the YouTube algo and it's totally free.
 So if you can do that, that would be great.
 A couple of quick updates about our Thoughtful Money movement here.
 First off, just want to let folks know that we just passed 50,000 subscribers on this
 YouTube channel.
 So thank you.
 That was in just a little bit over 30 days.
 So pretty much in our first month here, we went from zero subscribers to 50,000 subscribers.
 I'm being told that that's just phenomenal for YouTube.
 So thank you.
 That literally is due entirely to those of you who are watching this video.
 I cannot express how grateful I am for that, but hopefully this is just the beginning folks
 and it's off to the races from here.
 Let's see, you hopefully all caught the event that I did two days ago with Axel Merck, which
 was a live reaction to the Jerome Powell's press conference there where Axel was sort
 of react, giving us his thoughts in real time right after that press conference ended.
 The folks who were able to ask questions live there were the premium subscribers from my
 substack.
 I did that as a trial.
 It seemed to go really well.
 So folks, I am going to try to do that on some sort of regular schedule going forward.
 I'm hoping we can do it monthly.
 I can't promise that just yet, but know that I'm working to try to make that happen.
 So if you want to be able to participate in those live events, think about becoming a
 premium subscriber on my substack.
 Another reason to think about becoming one too is when I set up substack, I think I told
 you all, I just did the default price that it put there when I was setting it up.
 I didn't even have a product yet and folks started paying to upgrade even though I wasn't
 offering anything.
 They just wanted to support the movement, which was so wonderful.
 So I thought about, okay, well, what can I do to, I just don't want to pass a hat and
 take free money.
 I want to give real value in exchange.
 And so that was how I was able to resuscitate the Adam's notes, which I've been posting,
 which are my detailed summarizations of all the interviews that we do here.
 I'm continuing to do those, continue to add new value, hopefully on top of that, like
 these real time live events reacting to something happening in the world with a key expert like
 we just did with Axel.
 So hopefully you guys can see the reasons why upgrading the premium may be a useful
 investment.
 Reason why I'm talking about all this is, like I said, I just opened that up at the
 default that substack had at $8 a month, it's not very much.
 That is going to increase at the end of the month here to $15 just as I'm now a month
 into this business and getting a sense of what the cost structure is.
 So if you are a current premium subscriber, don't worry, you will be grandfathered in
 at your current price for as long as you remain a subscriber, that's what substack tells me.
 So if you stay subscribed for another 10 years, great, your price isn't going to change.
 If you've been thinking about becoming one, I'd recommend you upgrade the premium in the
 next couple of weeks before January 1st so that you can be too grandfathered into that
 lower price before it jumps up to $15 a month.
 Just wanted to give that public service announcement out there.
 All right, and in wrapping up here, we've got a lot of great interviews planned for
 next week.
 Hopefully I'm able to make them happen.
 If I am, here's who you can expect.
 We'll have an interview coming out the day after this one.
 This video launches with Michael Every from Rabobank and that is a really interesting
 one, folks.
 Very cerebral, very much sort of changing world order type of discussion.
 Michael's a super smart guy.
 He's based out of the US.
 He spent time both in China and Russia.
 He's got a great geopolitical worldview.
 Highly recommend if that topic interests you watching that video.
 I'll be interviewing Cameron Dawson.
 I'll be interviewing Michael Howell and that's going to be a great one and Michael, you'll
 I think be interested in that one because Michael's big thing is liquidity.
 So I'll be getting his latest update on where he thinks global liquidity is headed.
 We'll see if it matches yours, Michael, and if not, maybe we'll foster an interesting
 discussion there, but I'm really interested to see his latest data there.
 Speaking of data too, I'll be interviewing Lance Lambert.
 He is a housing analyst who just recently left.
 He'd been the housing analyst at Fortune for many, many years.
 He's now gone independent.
 It'll be his first appearance on this channel and then I'll be interviewing Darius Dale
 and speaking of data, if you guys have ever seen my previous interviews with Darius, he
 is the most data rich guy I've talked to.
 Lance is a very data-driven guy here.
 He likes to bring up his charts and whatnot.
 Michael, total junior varsity guy compared to Darius, Darius is like the MVP of that.
 So folks, if you like data, you're going to love that discussion with Darius.
 So in ending here, folks, Michael, I just want to thank you for your time here.
 Always great to have you on the channel.
 You're such a great expert and anyways, I just appreciate you also on short notice stepping
 in here for Lance when Lance couldn't make it.
 Folks, if you didn't see the interview with Axel yet, I highly recommend you watch that
 after this one.
 I'll put up a link to it right here.
 But Michael, again, I look forward to seeing you again on the channel as soon as you're
 able to come on here.
 Everybody else, thanks so much for watching.
 [END]
 [END]
 [END]
 [END]
 [BLANK_AUDIO]
