 We're going into a world in which, as long as these supply constraints are as binding as they are,
 that inflation will be a persistent threat, and by that I mean any demand surge is going
 to produce inflationary pressure. It's going to be a world with higher interest rates,
 higher costs of capital, lower valuations, and a difficult transition
 from a relatively highly indebted world, including sovereign debt.
 Welcome to Thoughtful Money. I'm its founder and your host, Adam Taggart. This is the first video
 to launch on this new YouTube channel where I, now operating independently, am continuing my work of
 interviewing the top minds in money and the markets to help regular investors like you better build
 wealth to fund your life goals, and I'm so pleased and privileged that the first guest expert to
 appear on this channel is Nobel Prize winning economist Michael Spence. He was also the dean
 of Stanford Business School when I got my MBA there a million years ago and I've got fond
 memories of his inspiration and leadership during that very formative time for me. Today we'll talk
 about the interconnected tangle of challenges the global economy, as well as society at large,
 currently faces, a predicament that Spence refers to as the perma crisis. Dean Spence,
 thank you so much for joining us today. Thank you, Adam. It's a pleasure. I'm delighted to be with you.
 Thank you. Well, it's so wonderful to see you after so many years. You look great. I look a lot
 older, a lot more weight in this beard. You look great. I'd love at some point at the end of this
 discussion to get a chance to delve into some of the great advice you gave us at Stanford and
 the fact that you've had a successful career but helped launch a lot of successful
 careers. I know you have a lot of sort of best practice advice for personal success
 in life and I hope we have some time to delve into that but let's start talking about your
 book, The Permacrisis, but even before that, since I last saw you, as I said in the intro,
 you won the Nobel Prize in Economics. Congratulations. That's a phenomenal achievement. Can you just
 give us a brief sense of the work that you were recognized for? Absolutely. So it was a big
 surprise. I mean, before I came to Stanford and got to know you, I was the Dean of the
 Faculty of Arts and Sciences at Harvard and my predecessor said, well, you know, if you take that
 job, meaning the one at Harvard, you'll never receive a Nobel Prize and I thought to myself,
 well, yeah, but to use the economist language, that's a non-binding constraint. I probably won't
 receive one anyway. So I launched into academic administration, which I just loved and learned a
 lot from all of you and all my colleagues. So the work, you know, there were three of us,
 Joe Stiglitz, George Akerlof, and me, all of us in one way or another, we're focused on
 what are called informational gaps and asymmetries in markets, but, you know,
 to a first approximation, there are just many, many situations in which buyers and sellers have
 different levels of knowledge about what the products or services are,
 their characteristics and so on. That's true of job markets. It's true in lots of financial
 markets. You know, we have financial disclosure laws that are designed to close those gaps and
 markets perform astonishingly poorly if those gaps are big and remain. So George talked about the,
 they're kind of illuminated a phenomenon called adverse selection, which is what happens in
 markets when you basically can't distinguish between different products that have different
 levels of quality in them. And in this extreme case, you know, that kind of structure can lead
 to the complete destruction of a market. That's the phenomenon of adverse selection that sort of
 high quality people facing the price that reflects average quality, essentially pull out of the
 market. And then that cascades down and eventually you can destroy the whole market. And then Joe
 and I, in different ways, we're trying to figure out, well, what markets are pretty creative
 entities? What happens in those markets that, you know, that endogenously, you know, not by
 regulation, that tends to close these gaps. In my case, it was signaling. And there are activities
 that people can undertake that have differential costs with respect to, you know, that are
 negatively correlated with the underlying quality characteristics that buyers want to know. And those
 signals turn out to be pretty important, not just in economics, but, you know, more broadly in
 society. So that's what I was after. And that then took root. Not, you know, again, not just me, but
 all three of us took root in economics. It's affected contract theory and mechanism design and
 all kinds of things. So I guess that's what they were recognizing back then.
 Yeah, super interesting. Hey, can you just give a quick example of signaling in terms of how that
 actually helps people close these gaps? Yeah. So, I mean, people work hard and, you know,
 the example I used was, you know, the job market, right? So people have very different
 characteristics, you know, coming into the job market, capabilities and so on. And so, you know,
 basically employers don't know that and it takes quite a long time to know it, but they do receive
 signals. And one of the most powerful signals is the educational one. So it makes a huge difference
 if you graduated from MIT in engineering or the Stanford Business School, or, you know, not to pick
 on just two institutions, but I mean, these institutions, you know, basically, because of
 the screening, the process of getting into them, the hard work people have to do, the fact that
 not everybody can do it, they carry powerful signals. So I mean, after I wrote my thesis and
 published a couple of papers, I was called out to the University of Chicago, where they were quite
 unhappy with me. Because they basically said, you know, you're saying the return to higher education
 is just the signaling effect. And human capital doesn't matter. And which was a kind of ridiculous
 extreme form. And I said, No, no, no, wait a minute. I wasn't saying there's no human capital
 acquisition in higher education. I was saying that in addition, at least for the, for the top
 institutions, there's a pretty powerful signaling effect as well. And the return to education is a
 combination of those two things. Got it. Fascinating. So there are behaviors that market
 participants can undertake, or perhaps credentials they can get or whatnot, that basically send a
 signal that, you know, help people assess their true value, right? It helps with price discovery.
 Yeah, I mean, to take another example, and I used to talk to Merton Miller about this, you know,
 if a company is not expected, you know, they know a lot about their, you know, present and future
 earnings potential, not everything. I mean, there's always surprises.
 And they're not supposed to cut the dividends, right? So if they cut the dividend, it issues
 a very powerful signal about what they think, you know, their future cash flows are going to be.
 So an example or imagine if management is buying stock, that's another set.
 Management is buying stock, you know, selling large amounts of stock, etc. Yeah. In it. I mean,
 this, the presence of informational survey symmetries is pretty, you kind of almost
 universal. I mean, it's not true of every market, but it's more common than people normally think,
 especially when you, you know, we don't talk about them in the first course in microeconomics
 and price theory. So, and that's probably the right way to teach it, but nevertheless,
 you know, they're there. Well, it's interesting because in the first course of microeconomics,
 we talk about how efficient markets are, right? Yeah. So you're actually layering on the nuances
 of how the world actually works there. In this topic of information asymmetry, Dean Spence is
 dearer to my heart than perhaps you even realize because it's a main reason why I founded
 this channel and why I've been doing the work I've been doing over the past two and a half years is
 because there has been historically a big information asymmetry between the sort of
 the wall street power players and just the regular investor. And one of the things that I've been
 trying to do with this channel is to reduce that asymmetry to sort of democratize in many ways,
 a lot of the knowledge and information and expertise that the top experts have,
 which really wall street's kind of had the corner on for a long time, but now the internet is
 allowing us to make that information much more freely available. So even in my own little corner
 of the world, I am working very hard on information asymmetry and hopefully to reduce it for societal
 benefit. No, I mean, I think it's tremendous what you're doing and more generally the presence of
 the internet and the fact that you can access very large amounts of information at essentially
 negligible cost does transform the informational structure of markets and does democratize it in
 many ways. I mean, there's some issues having to do with, well, what's believable and what's not.
 And so people have to sort of sort that out and maybe there's a role for signaling
 in that context, but the overall impact is just enormous.
 Alright, well in talking about overall impact, I want to now move to your book because
 it's about a really big issue. It is close to a lot of the issues that we talk about in this
 channel generally, but clearly you're concerned kind of about the global macro situation
 as are your co-authors of this book. You had some pretty credentialed partners in writing it.
 Mohamed Olerian, chief economic advisor of Allianz, and he took over the torch from Bill
 Gross at PIMCO. Many folks are familiar with him. Honestly, he's one of the guys I'd love to get on
 this channel as well. And then Gordon Brown, former UK prime minister. I mean, these are big
 hitters that you've joined forces with here. Clearly they're concerned as well, concerned
 enough to write this book with you. Look, the book is called Permacrisis, a plan to fix a fractured
 world. Can you maybe just define for us what you all meant by Permacrisis and what its key
 components are? Yeah, so I think that the title captures part of what we're after, which is
 a cascading sequence of crises. So we go back to the Asian financial crisis
 in the late 1990s and then the great financial crisis and the pandemic,
 then wars, now two of them, and climate shocks that are devastating
 various parts of the world and coming with increasing frequency and severity.
 And so we sort of thought, and I think the idea was this is a pretty confusing
 environment. And so maybe we can sort of make some sense of it a little bit, not completely.
 Nobody's arrogant enough to kind of be able to see through all this and then help people
 sort of navigate, whether they're companies or individuals or policymakers in various parts of
 the world. But when we looked at it carefully, I mean, it's a pretty daunting set of conditions
 that we face on the supply side of economies, on kind of regime change in the global economy,
 you know, a problem of mindsets that were conditioned by three decades of
 pretty benign conditions, no inflation, very low interest rates and costs of capital and so on.
 You know, and so we think it's sort of changing pretty fast and there's lots of, you know,
 problems, accidents, and so on that go along with that. We don't really have a plan to kind of fix a
 fractured world, but we thought if you start with an understanding of what we're dealing with,
 there's a lot of serious people, you know, because some committed to climate change,
 some committed to sort of increasing equity, some committed to try to reverse the kind of
 fragmentation and the global economy, some very concerned with kind of polarization
 and governance issues in our society. And so we thought we can probably at least help people by
 identifying what I call "mini-steps" in that direction. But on the authors, I mean,
 it's hilarious, you know, we have Gordon Brown, former Prime Minister of Britain and the longest
 serving Chancellor of the Exchequer in the British government, at least for a long time,
 and Mohamed Olerian is one of the most visible and knowledgeable commentators on sort of
 macroeconomics, financial markets and monetary policy, and then that other guy.
 Not at all. Other guy who happens to be a Nobel Prize winner in economics.
 Look, I'd love to dive into at least a few of these problem areas first, and first off,
 let me commend you as well. There's a lot of talk on the internet and on YouTube, and I've done a
 lot of it with a lot of other experts on what's wrong. There's not a lot of talk about what to do
 about it and the fact that you guys did what you could to start laying down the seeds for
 betterment. I commend you for that and I do want to talk to those micro-steps that you talked about
 in a moment. Before we get into the problems, and I guess we'll start with the economic ones
 because I'm guessing those are the ones that you understand best.
 Let me just ask you this because you sit at a really interesting intersection.
 I will say that there's sort of a skepticism that I think a lot of people in the public have about
 kind of our sovereign and corporate leaders these days, and that they're out of touch,
 they're driving their own interests or the interests of corporations, and they don't
 really care that much about the general public, and that they see these problems necessarily.
 Sometimes they maybe don't think these people really see them or appreciate them that much
 or they see them as opportunities to continue advancing their own agendas or enriching
 themselves. I think you live in a really interesting world where you spend a lot of time looking at the
 data and understanding the world through the data, but you do interact with a lot of
 these power players at different points of time. What's the reality like? Are these people
 genuinely more engaged in trying to solve these problems and whatnot, or is it more
 either a Game of Thrones or a let them eat cake type of world out there?
 Well, I think historically it's not a pretty picture, including for a long time my profession
 took the view that globalization and trade was basically a good thing, because in the aggregate
 there was benefits. If somebody said, "Yeah, but not everybody benefits, and some people probably
 get hurt pretty badly," then somebody would say, "You can compensate the losers." The problem with
 that is that there's no practical way to get that job done. I think one of the more attractive
 trends in the economics profession in the last 10 to 15 years is much, much more serious attention,
 and I think it is serious, not just words, to distributional issues. They're incredibly
 important, in part because we've come to understand that this is really political economy.
 You can't implement stuff in terms of governance and policies that drive change if everybody's
 decided to get off the train. That in some ways is a pretty good description of where we are.
 There's a massive loss of trust in institutions of various kinds, in various groups of people,
 exactly as you just said, Adam. That then makes it harder to move forward and do something that
 is designed to help everybody and their children and grandchildren. We wrote this book because we
 thought if we stay on the same course that we're on now in multiple dimensions, we're not going to
 be proud of the world that our children and grandchildren inherit. I think that's right.
 Now, let me go beyond my profession. Is there more serious interest now as you go around the world
 and talk to people who are arguably in positions of power? I think the answer is yes. Is it
 universal? No, I don't think so. I think there's still people who think the world that we've
 lived in before was terrific and don't really internalize the pain that was caused by some
 aspects of those growth patterns. It's a mixed picture, I guess, but the trend seems to me in
 the right direction. It sounds like you said the skepticism has been earned, but we have at least
 a slow awakening or changing happening, but it's a slow process and not everybody's
 on the same train yet. But we'll try to be optimistic. I'm curious. Did you write the book?
 Sorry, go ahead. No, I was just saying the amount of attention that -- there's a group
 of economists now who are very influential, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez and others,
 talking basically about distributional issues, so they're just getting a lot of attention and I
 don't think it's just in economics, and this is really serious sort of long-term data intensive
 work that's designed to convince people that we really need to think about these things, so
 I don't think it's just words. Okay, sorry I've got so many questions here for you. I'm going to
 try to flight them in an intelligent order, but do you feel -- and don't let me put words in your
 mouth -- but do you feel like we are hurtling towards -- I guess crisis is the right word,
 and of course you wrote your book Permacrisis and maybe I've already answered the question,
 but do you feel like we're sort of on a trajectory to a mounting crisis unless we
 proactively find a better way to start doing things? In some dimensions, yes. In some
 dimensions, no. So the one where I think we're hurtling towards something pretty bad
 unless we change direction pretty quickly is the climate change. You know, we're -- and the
 scientists are using increasingly alarmist language in talking about it. I think the
 one they've landed on most recently is probably the most effective, which is if you think
 of there being a carbon budget associated with holding temperature increases on average to 1.5
 degrees Celsius, that carbon budget on our current trajectory will be used up, I think, before the
 end of this decade. And so -- and that's a pretty kind of daunting task because it's hard to imagine
 changing course on a global basis fast enough to prevent, you know, some overshoot of that
 carbon budget. That one, I think, has existential sort of issues. Many of the other things we talk
 about, you know, or it's -- the question is basically underperformance, right? The global
 economy is fragmenting. Some of that's inevitable because we have, you know, strategic competition,
 an override that has to do with national security, economic security, energy security, food security,
 all kinds of things are modifying the way the global economy runs, you know, as compared with
 before where basically the only considerations were economic efficiency and comparative advantage,
 right? So that's not -- we've left that world behind, but that doesn't mean we have to kind
 of give up on everything and the benefits. We just have a more complicated architecture to
 construct collaboratively, you know, on a global basis to kind of try to get it done.
 So that would be an example where, you know, the failure is not perhaps catastrophic unless you're
 talking about the low-income countries that might just get cut off at the pass. But if you're
 talking about ordinary citizens in the wide range of middle-income countries and the developed
 countries, this is just, you know, underperformance. And then the same thing goes for macroeconomic
 policy. You know, if your mindset is conditioned on the previous three decades with very little
 inflation and so on, then there's a lot of accidents and mistakes. There's an awful lot of
 debt out there, sovereign debt, etc. You know, we're living in a rising interest rate environment.
 Unless you think after the inflation fight, all the interest rates are going to come plummeting
 back down to where we were before, close to zero. You know, there's a kind of difficult
 few years of transitions here to deal with and we're just trying to kind of increase awareness
 of that, but they're not total collapse scenarios. Yeah, it's not like existential to
 the species that perhaps if climate-wise we lose our food systems, it could be.
 You're taking it right where I want to take it on the economic side of things. Real quick,
 I just want to shoehorn one question and to get it out of my mind, which is who did you write this
 book for more? Was it more for the policy makers and the decision makers or was it more for the
 average person? It's really a combination, right? I personally, I think I would say the same for the
 co-authors. We recognize not everybody's going to want to pick up this book, but we wanted to write
 it in such a way that a wide range of people were kind of interested and concerned about what's
 going on, had access to it, so that it's not for people who are in some sense kind of involved in
 these issues in the technical sense. And by the way, that's why we had a fourth co-author,
 who's very important, a very smart guy named Reid Liddell, who's worked with Gordon Brown before,
 and you know, and that was our serious attempt to do two things. One is to make it accessible
 because he's a really good writer and he's really smart about understanding, you know,
 what the issues are as well. So that was part of it. And the other part is if three people
 wrote three papers and that was the whole story and the book would look like three papers glued
 together as opposed to a book that was written collaboratively by three people. So Reid's a
 pretty important part of that. So I would say, I mean, in summary, we did not want to write this
 for a highly specialized audience. Okay, great. So, you know, obviously the implications of all
 these things appeal to everybody, but it's a book that the average person can become better educated
 about what's going on, hopefully take some preemptive steps today that might improve their,
 reduce their vulnerability going forward, and obviously hopefully influence some of the people
 that are in positions to actually help with the decision making on some of these issues. Okay,
 now to the economy. You mentioned the one word that I was going to get to with you if you hadn't
 brought it up, which was debt. So I think one of the big questions that's out there
 is does our current economic model have sort of, I don't know, a reckoning
 moment kind of built into it on the debt side of things? If we keep amassing debts at the way that
 we currently are, at least in the major western economies right now, does that get to a point
 where the system can't operate as intended? And as a good example of that, which we seem to be
 approaching in a faster and faster rate right now, is when the debt service cost on your national debt
 starts eating up all of your tax revenues, that begins to become a really big problem.
 Absolutely. So the question is how are we going to get from here to there?
 So let's backtrack a minute. If you think all this stuff was transitory, which is what the
 central banks thought for a while as we came out of the pandemic, then you don't worry about it
 too much because it's kind of annoying right now. But these impacts like declining fiscal space,
 which is what you were just talking about, are going to go away. So part of our purpose
 in writing the book was to say nobody knows with great certainty what's going to happen
 over the rest of the decade, but I often ask people the following questions. So we lived in
 a world after the great financial crisis which had the following characteristics. One, very low
 approaching zero interest rates. Two, massive injections of liquidity into the system designed
 to try to relax the demand constraints on growth that resulted from the balance sheet damage in the
 great financial crisis. And three, all of that in the presence of essentially no sign of inflation
 and inflation lurking below targets. So I say to people after I describe some of the supply side
 constraints that are secular and new and non-transitory, and then say, you know,
 do you want to bet your kids savings that we're going to go back to the world that we, you know,
 lived in up to the pandemic? Most people kind of snap to attention and say, well, maybe not, right?
 So my version of that, and I'm not, you know, people, there's a range of opinions on this,
 is that we're going into a world in which as long as these supply constraints are as binding as they
 are, that inflation will be a persistent threat, and by that I mean any demand surge is going to
 produce inflationary pressure. It's going to be a world with higher interest rates, higher costs of
 capital, lower valuations, and a difficult transition from a relatively highly indebted
 world, including sovereign debt. Okay, so just to underscore, I think you just said it well,
 but you really do see sort of a pre-pandemic era trend and a post-pandemic era trend where we had,
 I mean, depending on how you look at it, sort of almost 40 years of disinflation and
 lowering cost of capital and increasing liquidity intervention by the central banks to now at least,
 it sounds like you see secular inflation from here, secular higher cost of capital from here,
 and maybe sort of spotty or episodic central bank intervention, and we're certainly in an
 intervention off moment at the moment right now, at least in the major economies. If we
 start getting into trouble with the markets again or something breaks under these higher interest
 rates, presumably a lot of people think the central banks may intervene again, but if they do
 and they restoke inflation like you're talking about, we may be in the sort of stop-start world
 going forward. Did I summarize your outlook correctly? Yeah, except you said four years.
 I would have said more like three decades. Oh, I'm sorry. I meant F-O-R years, like four years,
 not four years. Four years, yes. We lived in that world and a lot of generation and a half of people
 think that's normal. That's when all was said and done and you take the shocks away. Oh, I'm sorry,
 40 years is what I meant, which was the decline from the interest rate heights in the 80s,
 right? So we had like four decades basically of people getting attenuated to that world, right?
 Exactly right. Yeah, so it's that transition and the mindsets, changes that have to go with it,
 if we're right. I mean, we call what you just described regime change. It's a fairly big change
 in the way the global economy operates, and at least from my perspective, it's because
 for the first time we have serious supply-side constraints. The elasticity, both the cost and
 the elasticity on the supply side have changed in a way that makes for a different world.
 Okay, so in that world, if it's characterized by those factors,
 those all pretty much weigh on economic growth and we've had declining economic growth compared
 to previous eras in the 20th century, even during that 40-year kind of Goldilocks period I just
 talked about, right? So we've had not great growth and we're probably going to have even worse growth
 going forward given these headwinds that you mentioned. So I imagine that manifests in just
 being able to grow less and therefore I use the term lower valuations going forward. Are
 investors going to have to kind of prepare for a world where they're not going to get this
 steady eddy just by the dip, the market only goes up year after year after year? Will they
 need to readjust their expectations about what returns are possible in the markets?
 I think so. I'm not suggesting that there won't be sort of
 growth spurts, there won't be sectors that have high growth potential, at least I try to invest in
 those through people I trust who know what they're doing. I don't mean to paint with an
 excessively broad brush, but are we going to live in a world in which valuations are driven by very
 low discount rates in the indefinite future? I don't think so. So it feels to me like a very
 different environment and people in the private equity world are feeling this transition to a new
 set of valuations is not a fun process. I mean, we've done this before, we did it in the internet
 bubble and we're doing it again. And the private equity markets respond more slowly than the public
 ones. So the public ones, this is a new reality, we're adjusting to it, maybe not instantly,
 but relatively quickly, that happens more slowly on the private equity side and is a difficult
 process. Right. Okay, so here's where I'm going with this. We have had a pretty violent regime
 change in both inflation and cost of capital. When you look at how far and violently a
 short period of time interest rates have risen and now yields on debt have risen,
 it's almost unprecedented. And yet we haven't gone into recession. The markets had a bad year
 last year, but it wasn't like a market crash or anything like that and they're up this year.
 So I know you're not a market strategist. You sit way back, operate at a much higher
 level on what's going on the economy, but are you surprised that we have not kind of
 lurched into some sort of recession given this shock to the system? And do you think
 one is avoidable? Because this year we heard a lot of talk about -- seemed like everybody thought
 we'd be in recession starting 2023, but then the narrative changed to soft landing and then no
 landing. Do you think the odds are good that we can escape having to avoid some sort of
 blow or injury from this violent change in interest rates?
 Yeah, I think so. I mean the economy, I think everybody's surprised, the American economy
 has turned out to be stunningly resilient. I attribute that to a couple of things. One is
 the fundamental kind of dynamism is still there. And secondly, in the pandemic the government took
 a huge amount of balance sheet damage in the corporate sector, including small businesses
 and the household sector, and transferred it to the sovereign balance sheet, which left the
 balance sheets as compared with the GFC in critical sectors. I mean in the household
 sector if you wreck the balance sheets it won't take long before you've wrecked consumption.
 Consumption's holding up fine and I think that's partly a result of some pretty smart
 policies. I mean they have consequences. Sovereign debt at 100% of GDP is different from
 sovereign debt at 60% of GDP in a rising interest rate environment, and so we got to deal with that.
 Inflation was a consequence as well, right? I mean sending direct stimulus to households
 increased the velocity of money and therefore we got inflation? Yeah, so you combine supply
 side constraints from all kinds of sources, aging, diversification of supply
 change which is an expensive proposition, declining productivity and all that, and then
 produce a demand surge which is partly just pent-up demand coming out of the the pandemic,
 but turbocharged by relief of balance sheet damage in the household sector, and sure
 you're set up on both sides of that equation, right? The supply side isn't
 going to respond very quickly anymore unlike the past, and the demand side is surging
 at a tremendous rate and you get inflation. And the bet, and remember the bet the central
 banks made, and the reason why the interest rates went up so fast is because they got started late,
 was that the supply side constraints were transitory. We'd be transitory, yeah. We were
 transitory and so all of a sudden this demand surge would be accommodated by adjustments
 and some of them were transitory. I mean, let's be honest, right? Ocean shipping costs aren't
 $10,000 per container anymore across the Pacific. They're back down to $2,000. China wasn't
 going to stay in zero COVID mode, although the bounce back has been less dramatic than most
 people thought. The semiconductor industry is more or less sorted out in terms of
 kind of blockages and supply shortages, and since they are pretty much intermediate products in
 every sector in the economy practically, that's a pretty dramatic change. Some it was transitory,
 but what was missed was the non-transitory part, right? In which non-transitory elements do you
 think are most important going forward? Is it the redrawing of supply chains and reshoring more of
 the labor? Which ones have you sort of most convinced that inflation is going to be
 secularly higher as a result? So I think there's several. One is the fading of the emerging economy
 growth story. You had massive amounts of productive capacity introduced into the
 global economy. That's still going on to some extent, but there isn't another China
 out there, okay? We're just not going to do that again. And that produced dramatic deflationary
 forces. I mean, if you look at the 20 years coming up to the crisis, at the components of the
 consumer price index, everything that was imported declined in nominal terms. That's even before you
 subtract the overall rate of inflation to get the real effect. It's just dramatic. I mean,
 if you took that away, we would have had an inflationary environment. So that's one.
 Two is this aging. I mean, we really are aging. And it varies from place to place. But a lot of
 the baby boomers have decided enough is enough, and they've stopped working. But they haven't
 stopped consuming, right? So you get an instantaneous, nearly instantaneous kind of
 break. There's huge changes in labor market behavior. We have shortages in all the major labor,
 you know, I mean, big labor markets in the United States. Pick any one. Government, healthcare,
 you know, traditional retail, hospitality, construction, right? I mean, people have changed
 their behavior. They don't want to work when it's inflexible, or dangerous, or stressful, or low
 paid. Right. And that also combines with your demographic number two there, which is we just
 have 10,000 boomers basically taking themselves out of the workforce every day, right? Yeah,
 exactly. Right. And then you've got this, you know, I mean, I think the other than the declining
 productivity trend, which I'm hoping will be reversed with, you know, the application of
 technology, but we'll get to that later, is in the global supply chains are being constructed
 on a completely different basis, you know, in pursuit of resilience, and security, there's a
 dramatic- Cost being an important part of that, right, going from low cost to higher cost in most
 cases. Yeah, I mean, here in Europe, we're diversifying at light speed, away from dependence
 on Russian fossil fuels. It's a very expensive process, right? Maybe Americans don't feel this.
 I mean, they feel the energy prices going up, and they're about to go up again, I'm afraid,
 because of the most recent conflict. But yeah, I mean, that's a good example. But it's going on,
 really, for the first time all over the world, right? We're just not building supply chains by
 going to the low-cost source anymore. We may stay with the low-cost source, but we're going
 to diversify, and companies are doing it, and for the first time, economic policy is kind of right
 behind them, essentially pushing in the same direction. Okay, so I've got like five hours
 worth of material to do. Dean Spence, don't worry, we're going to keep it all within the hour here,
 but right now, in the US at least, the Federal Reserve is largely pumping the brakes, right?
 It's been raising interest rates. It's been doing QT. It's trying to get inflation down back under
 its 2% target here, right? But on the fiscal side, government spending has been at one of the highest,
 certainly, percentages of GDP we've ever seen and never seen this high outside of a wartime
 situation. So in many ways, the administration and Congress are kind of hitting the gas at the same
 time that the Federal Reserve, the central banks, are trying to hit the brakes. Obviously, that's
 got to not help with getting inflation under control. Do we kind of have a mismatch of policies
 going on right now? Could we be more effectively joining our policies than we are right now?
 Yeah, I think so. I mean, that's something that Mohamed writes about a lot.
 So we lived in a world, I mean, he wrote a book called The Only Game in Town, and he meant the
 central banks, right? So in a world where there's a kind of demand problem, and the supply side isn't
 really an issue, or people think it's not an issue, then basically, the central banks are sitting
 there. Nobody questions that they can cut off demand with interest rates, eventually, working
 hard at it. There's a different question, which is whether they can generate demand by lowering
 interest rates, given the zero lower bound and limits on the amount of liquidity they can pump in
 and whatnot. But yeah, I think we do need supply side policies. So it's not a question of just
 saying, well, the government shouldn't be sort of stimulating the economy at the same time
 that the central bank is fighting inflation. But a real conversation about kind of getting the
 balance right. I mean, a lot of the government spending, not all, is associated with a big
 set of expenditures associated with pandemic recovery. And then you had the so-called Inflation
 Reduction Act, which is our kind of re-entry into the kind of sustainability agenda. And you have
 the Chips and Science Act, which has multiple objectives, you know, I won't bore your listeners
 with. I mean, part of it is just plain long-term growth and an investment in technology. Part of it
 is national security, bringing enough stuff home so that if we have to expand it, we will be able
 to do it. And there's not just one Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Association in the
 world. Exactly. This is the resilience you were talking about. Yeah. This is the resilience. And
 then part of it's just holding China down. What everyone thinks about whether that's a good idea
 or possible or whatever. So it's a kind of complicated mix of a whole bunch of different,
 at least three different things. But anyway, they're pretty big expenditure items. And
 I don't think, I mean, some people think they're just a waste of money. So there's a range of
 opinions on that. I don't. I think you need to invest in sort of long-term human capital
 technology and so on, if you want to drive long-term growth in the economy. So that's
 not the first thing I would consider cutting. But then you have a real kind of coordination
 problem between fiscal and monetary policy. I mean, some people think, I think it's a growing
 number that the central banks can't talk about changing the inflation target because, you know,
 as you start moving the goalposts, then you lose your credibility. But lots of people think,
 you know, they may sort of settle down at 3% eventually. And in a world that's changing
 structurally and where relative prices are changing fairly fast, maybe 3% isn't crazy
 if it's credible and stable. Okay, got it. I'd love to keep diving into that, but I want to get
 to the solutions part. Real quick before I do, I'm just going to chew on this bone one last time.
 You talked about the US economy being more resilient than most folks expected.
 And of course, there is stimulus going in. We just talked about some of that.
 But you sort of talked about how the ripple effect of the lag effect, or maybe the lag effect ripples
 across different markets at different speeds. And you talked about how private equity is slower.
 And clearly the housing market is moving slowly right now. It has frozen, but prices haven't
 come down. But the general inverse relationship between cost of a mortgage and price of a house,
 we've seen mortgages more than double, we've seen prices of housing go down by like a percent
 nationally. So my question is, do you expect to see more of the lag effect express itself as
 time go on here, and maybe more defaults begin to ripple through the system as these slower markets
 begin to feel the brunt of that, and the longer we remain higher for longer, to use Powell's words,
 the more balance sheets across America, both corporate and domestic or personal household,
 begin to re-rate at higher rates, and in some cases, much higher rates. For a lot of companies
 that are sitting on a current capital structure that has 3% debt, when those come up for maturity,
 they're going to be re-rating at something over 2x that.
 Yeah, no, that's right. I don't think of myself as an expert on the exact timing in these markets,
 and there are people who make their living understanding and communicating about that.
 But in general, we've seen this before, when you have a big change in housing prices,
 there's a lag. What happens first is the transactions dry out. Why? Because the sellers
 don't believe it. It takes a few months before they decided the value of the thing fundamentally
 changed. I saw this here in Italy. When trouble hit in the sovereign debt crisis, which followed
 the great financial crisis over here, things got pretty ugly, including in the banking sector,
 people had trouble getting mortgages at all, regardless of the price.
 And the housing market froze up. People just didn't believe that their €2 million
 apartment wasn't worth €2 million anymore. And it takes quite a while before those adjustments
 occur. So yes, there's bottom line as well. I'm not an expert. There's clearly lags.
 There's lags in the refinancing. There's lags in believing the new market conditions and so on.
 I think down the road, we could have some damage in terms of people's balance sheets
 and whatnot that we haven't seen so far. Okay, great. That's exactly where I was going,
 just to get your opinion on that. Okay, thank you for sharing. All right, so now to the more fun
 stuff. So we've talked about some of the big challenges we face. What are some of those
 micro steps, at least, that you and your co-authors advised that we, either as a grand populous or just
 as individuals, should consider embracing to help mitigate what may lie ahead? So the overlay,
 in my mind anyway, when we went into this, and in general, is notwithstanding the kind of turbulence,
 the crises, the headwinds, and so on that we've already talked about, we're living in a world in
 which there's three enormously powerful scientific and technological revolutions underway. One is the
 digital transformations, multi-decade, and it looks to be getting more and more powerful as we go
 along. We were writing this book when, you know, generative AI kind of hit the public awareness,
 and it's stunning. We'll come back to that. But there's a revolution in biomedical science and
 life sciences going on, and then there's this fair amount of technology that's pretty impressive in
 the energy transition that is the essence of the sustainability agenda. So I thought, and when I
 went and looked, you know, what I thought I found was not only was there sort of stunning
 breakthroughs, but that you had really powerful technologies that were widely accessible and
 declining in cost, and so therefore, you know, available to people. And I thought, well, you know,
 with tools as powerful, we ought to be able to engineer something that looks a little bit
 different from what's going on now. And that's part of, I think, the answer. I'm not sure they're
 many steps, because they won't happen overnight. Gen AI is probably going to transform
 among the whole range of economies, but it won't happen tomorrow or even next year.
 We're in a period of intense exploration and experimentation because it's so new.
 But, you know, if we're right, that has the potential really across the economy to change
 the kind of the business models and ultimately produce an enormous productivity surge.
 It's transformative, right? So the kind of flip side of the, you know, it's a pretty tough world,
 we've got geopolitical tensions, we've got polarization, we've got supply side constraints,
 and so on, is we've also got these incredibly powerful tools. Let me give it, I mean, I'll give
 you two examples. Solar has caused about somewhere between a fifth and a tenth of what it did 10 years
 ago. I mean, it's amazing. You know, in the proper kind of environment, it's competitive with
 traditional fossil fuel based, you know, electricity generation. The one that I don't
 think most people know about, except in the tech world, is, you know, DeepMind, which is now was
 bought by Alphabet, Google, has done a lot of stunning things. The one most people, you know,
 may have heard of was me kind of winning the game of Go in two rounds on the second round by playing,
 by the AI's playing against themselves. But the one that I think is very striking is called Alpha
 Fold. And basically, they, they set themselves the task of predicting the three dimensional structure
 of proteins from the amino acid sequence that defines it. Sounds technical, but the three
 dimensional structure is absolutely crucial, because that determines what, you know, what molecules
 bind to. So it's for pharmaceuticals, you know, vaccines, etc. It's just crucial. And it, and it
 can be done in a lab, but it takes, you know, somewhere between months and years to figure it
 out. And so they said, well, maybe AI can help. And we'll see if we can predict the three dimensional
 structure of these things. And basically, it worked. I mean, the predictions aren't perfect,
 but they're pretty good. And once they realized they'd done it, then they took the 200 million
 known proteins in the world, predicted the three dimensional structure, and published it as open
 source. Anybody in the world can go look it up. And so while that's not going to intersect
 anybody's lives directly, it may intersect them when, you know, they when, you know, immunotherapy
 kind of, you know, gets advanced, and they don't die. But in the world of biomedical science,
 it's a productivity enhancing shock of enormous magnitude. A seismic event. Yeah. So, okay, so
 what I hear you're saying here is, you know, sort of from a humanities prosperity stake,
 we should really be leaning into these technologies that have the benefit of,
 I think, increasing at exponential rates in terms of their ability to progress. And they also
 oftentimes can drive down costs exponentially too. So there's two exponential curves that
 are helping you out there. And that's fascinating. We don't have time to go through the individual
 examples in the book. I recommend that folks go to the book and do that. Let me ask just
 a question here that sticks in my mind about this. And I'm curious if you share this issue or not.
 I believe it was Keynes who talked about technological displacement,
 where he basically said, look, if you can, if you can displace human labor by, you know,
 transitioning to some sort of, you know, alternative solution, and in the old days,
 it was, you know, cars over horse and carriages, right, that type of thing,
 said you should, you should always do that. That makes economic sense. But you have to be careful
 at the rate at which you do it. In other words, if you displace the labor so fast, if you displace
 the labor faster than your ability to repurpose it to, you know, a higher productive use, you end
 up creating a societal problem that may be more costly than the economic gains that you are
 creating. And I do wonder in this era of automation and AI and whatnot, that we are quickly hollowing
 out the job market, maybe even at a faster rate than we expect, because AI is really going to be
 able to go up the stack of skills, right, and start displacing a lot more white collar workers
 than folks even imagined to. Where just the question is, what are we going to do with all
 these people, especially if we start making them live a lot longer through all these biomedical
 advances as well? Do you think about that? Oh, yeah, no, I mean, so this is a lively
 kind of discussion that's going on. And it's not the first time it's occurred. I mean,
 it's been going on since the start of the Industrial Revolution. Right. But, you know,
 digital is different. So, you know, we can't just rely on kind of historical experience.
 So I mean, I think there's two things to say about it. One, you know, there is an issue of pace.
 So that part's right, right? You can do some stuff so fast that that kind of structural
 adaptation that's essentially inherently limited in any economy, you know, people don't change
 their behavior, they don't change their skills, organizations don't change their business models,
 you know, overnight. So there's natural things that slow things down. But you can imagine some
 serious imbalances, you know, that and that are disruptive of people's lives on the way through.
 So that's point one. Point two, is everybody thinks that digital is when it comes to jobs
 is automation. Just automatically. If a senior hospital administrator starts talking about using
 AI, there's panic. And the panic is, they're coming for jobs, right? And it's not necessarily
 an accurate description of what's going to happen. So part of the reasons for writing about this,
 I just wrote something with James Manica on this in Foreign Affairs, is, you know,
 to kind of help people understand that that's not necessarily where we're going.
 Erik Brynjolfsson at Stanford wrote an influential paper in a Daedalus volume that James edited,
 or really put together. It's an extraordinarily useful volume, by the way, it's on AI.
 It's and it's got everything in it. It's not just economics, it's the AI people, it's, you know,
 it's, you know, artificial general intelligence and when it's going to happen and all kinds of
 things. But he said there's a there's a there's a thing called the touring trap. It's his term.
 And and the idea is, I think, important, which is Alan Turing, who's a genius.
 Developer of the computer, basically.
 Yeah, basically. Yeah. We propose that we evaluate progress in the digital domain,
 where what became the digital domain, by imagining asking the question, you know,
 can we produce a machine that interacts with the human in such a way that the human thinks
 that he or she is interacting with another human? So that was the Turing test, right?
 Most AI is evaluated when you just read the literature based on how it performs relative
 to humans, right? So in image recognition, which is a revolutionary development in the last decade,
 though, you know, all the attention is focused on when they cross, you know, and, and they again,
 and the AI identifies the images better than the average human. Or, you know, Gen AI takes
 the LSAT test and performs better than the average test taker. This is a law school aptitude test,
 right? That's okay. There's nothing's gone wrong so far, because it's probably a pretty good way
 to benchmark progress. But it's a very short step from there to say, well, okay, so now the AI
 performs better than the human in this test. So we'll just replace the humans. And that's where
 the automation bias comes from. Right. But remember, these AI's are prediction machines,
 they're not perfect, right? There's a, you know, a well known story that was written up in the press
 of a doctor who used chat GPT to prepare a brief and didn't check it. Right. And handed it in to
 the court. Well, it turns out, you know, that we know that these things have hallucinations,
 is the term that tech people use, they make stuff up, right? This one made up all the legal
 precedents that were handed in. Right. So that doesn't surprise me. Yeah, no, I mean,
 so that probably won't happen too many more times once people get the hang of it.
 You know, and, and so, yeah, I mean, I'll give it another example. These, an AI is going to write
 the first draft of a report that a doctor writes, doctors spend an incredible amount of time writing
 up reports, because they have to write, we need that information in the system. The AI will write
 the first draft that probably reduces, you know, 80% of the doctor's time. Right. So if you define
 the task, as the first draft, that's automation. But no doctor in their right mind, is going to
 hand in the first draft, right, they're going to check it. That's the other 20%. And if you define
 the task as producing the report that's needed, it's human machine collaboration. It's augmentation,
 you have a powerful digital assistant that does something that uses up a lot of your time
 that we didn't have before. I mean, it's an incredible achievement. And, you know,
 will a doctor spend more time on medicine, probably, maybe they even spend a little more
 time on the golf course. That's okay. Or just more time with their patients, which would be
 wonderful. We're all familiar with the other. What I really want to say is, when you go looking
 carefully across a wide range of potential applications of this, you get you get the same
 story with slight variations over and over and over again, right? That dominant, the dominant
 impact is likely to be once people learn how to use this powerful digital assistants, assistants
 and machine, you know, human or even machine systems, collaboration. I mean, they're starting
 to use AI's to try to increase the transparency of these incredibly complex things called global
 supply chains. They're completely opaque. No human being can kind of figure out all
 because they're too complicated. Yeah, they're just too complicated. And, and yeah, exactly.
 Right. I mean, there's a little bit of fragmentation of the data, but they're just
 too complicated. That's likely, I'll stop, but I mean, they're, you know,
 I mean, people who've studied at the Stanford Business School remember what the bullwhip effect
 is, right? You know, there's some people out at the end of supply chains reacting to the latest
 thing that somebody on the next part of the supply chain does. You'll be pleased to hear,
 Dean Spence, that I have created videos dedicated to explaining the bullwhip effect from what I
 learned at Stanford. That's great. Okay. Then I don't have to explain it anymore. But anyway,
 so that could materially transform that. Anyway, bottom line is, I think there's real potential
 for this to be dominantly augmentation when you stand back from it far enough. And, but there,
 but the last thing I'll mention, because it's, your question is really important is implementation
 is going to be critical. You know, you can't stand up and say, geez, we found this wonderful
 technology, we're going to introduce it, and have people sitting there thinking, you know,
 they're coming from my job. So the soft skills, the implementation of major structural change,
 or business model change, is going to be just as important as the technology itself.
 Okay. So what I'm taking from this is, I imagine, correct me if any of this is wrong,
 your advice to the average viewer here would be, you know, skill up on AI, like a lot of us just
 have heard about it. We think, oh, it sounds sciency, and I've got my life to focus on here,
 I'm just not going to really pay all that much attention to it until it's right in front of my
 face. My guess is you would say, be a little more proactive than that, lean into it, look for ways
 in which it can help you do what you do better and be at the forefront of this wave. From a policy
 standpoint, I hear you saying, we can't just let the free market ride this thing. There's going to
 have to be a partnership with policy that says, you know, how do we let this thing get out into
 the world in a way that doesn't necessarily create the societal issues that Cain warned about with
 technological displacement? You're sort of nodding as I'm saying all this.
 Yep. No, I think the policy thing has two sides to it. One is, there's a lot of potential damage
 and, you know, downside risk associated with the inappropriate use of these technologies. So,
 you know, policy has to deal with that. And that's multi-dimensional. I mean,
 the AI read your book and integrated it into the way it thinks about the world.
 Is there some intellectual property issue there? Probably yes. And we don't know how to handle it
 yet. The other part is positive, right? I mean, you know, we could have this, you know, tech and
 finance going full speed ahead with AI and a whole bunch of sectors lagging behind. We've done this
 before in earlier rounds of digital transformation. And we're not going to get the productivity surge
 and we'll get, you know, highly unequal results across sectors, you know, if we get that kind of
 divergence again. And government has a role in, you know, accelerating and increasing the footprint
 of the adoption and diffusion options for small and medium sized businesses. You know, JP Morgan,
 can spend a ton of money, you know, experimenting with AI in the way they do business, you know,
 a smaller business doesn't have the resources. So, yeah, there's a role for government on both the,
 you know, the positive side of the use of the technology and preventing, you know, some of
 these downside risks. I would say, I think James agrees with this, that the policy agenda at the
 moment is heavily biased toward the downside. Right. And we're kind of this, the paper is a little
 bit of a plea, you know, not to ignore that, because it's important, but pay attention to the
 upside potential as well. All right. Dean Spence, this has been a fantastic discussion. In our last
 couple minutes, I want to get to one more topic real quickly before I do. Where can people buy
 this book? Just anywhere books are sold? Yeah, in America now. It was published in the UK,
 but distributed in the United States, and I believe it's widely available now. And you can
 certainly find it on Amazon or any of the online booksellers. So we'd love it if people take a look
 and give us some feedback. Okay, great. And again, folks, it's Permacrisis, a plan to fix a fractured
 world. Dean Spence, in just the last couple of minutes we have here, I do want to squeeze in this
 question for you, because as I said earlier, you gave us some wonderful advice throughout our
 tenure at Stanford. And I remember sitting, people have heard me tell this on previous videos,
 but I remember sitting in a room with you and a bunch of other of my classmates as we were getting
 ready to graduate. And you were kind of just taking Q&A from folks. And one person said, "Hey,
 Dean Spence, I've got a job offer doing what I did before that's pretty lucrative, and I'm kind
 of lukewarm on it. I could do it. The one that really excites me is this other one, but it's in a
 field that I've never worked in before, and it would require me moving out with my wife to
 this new place that we've never lived before, and we're in the process of starting a family."
 And your advice was, as I recall, was, "Hey, you get ahead in life by taking risks, and that you're a
 fan of risk-taking, but calculated risk-taking." And your warning was, don't take on too many risks
 in parallel, because if you do, you risk not being able to do any of them well, and you're sort of
 sacrificing your odds for success. I've really taken that to heart in my career, and it actually
 was a factor in my recent decision to go independent. I had a lot of things going on
 this year that were unexpected, and I was able to sort of flight them in serial versus parallel so
 that when I took this big leap, I wasn't burdened with undue other risks at the time. So I'm just
 curious, do you have any other bits of advice like that for just sort of general success in the world
 given the fact that you've had such a successful career but you've helped so many other people
 birth some phenomenal careers? Well, when I was writing my thesis, a lot of thesis advisors
 would have said, "That's kind of risky. Nobody's heard of that. Why don't you do something else,
 and then you can go back to that later after you have a job and have taught or
 gotten tenure and stuff." And my thesis advisors didn't tell me that, and I've always been
 grateful to them. I mean, I think when you're young, you're at your most creative, right?
 For sure. There are just too many examples of this because you're not trapped by conventional wisdom,
 you know, a whole bunch of conceptual apparatus that you can't kind of get rid of.
 I mean, there are advantages to being a little older and having experience, but I think on
 balance and in most lines of human endeavor, there's a big advantage to youth. And so,
 it's the time to take risks and look for something that's truly rewarding, where you
 make a big difference or do something important, but then the calculated part comes in. You know,
 you can't do that on every front at the same moment. I mean, one of the investment banking
 types came along, and I've seen this over and over again, and said, "Look, if you're going to
 take a shot at being an entrepreneur or something, then don't get yourself a big mortgage at the same
 time and do all those other things." I remember being in Singapore, which is a pretty dynamic
 place now, and they were trying to build the kind of innovative side of that economy.
 And I said, "Well, you know, what are the obstacles?" And they said, "Well, you know,
 everybody's supposed to get married and have a house and whatnot, and pretty soon, you know,
 they're in a position where, you know, taking that kind of risk doesn't make a whole lot of sense."
 So, I can't think of anything that is more important, especially for younger folks,
 is what you talked about. But on these technology sides, I think not everybody's going to be
 interested in everything, but this is a really bad time to sit on the sidelines, right, and sort of
 say, "Well, that's kind of in somebody else's world. I don't really understand it." I think
 we get asked this question a lot by business people. I don't think one should rush into
 adopting various kinds of fancy new technology, you know, too quickly. But sort of just waiting
 on the sidelines and not paying attention strikes me as an even more dangerous thing.
 So, what I've tried to do all along is just, you know, go talk to people who know what they're
 talking about in various fields and try to get an education. I guess I learned that as being a dean,
 you know. I was talking to colleagues who were doing this, that, and the other thing,
 behavioral economics, you know, molecular biology, this, that, and the other thing.
 And I thought, A, it's fun to learn about what they're doing, even if you don't get to the
 depth they're at. But it's also, you know, a way of kind of keeping up, I think is the way I would
 say it, keeping up, and then making choices that are based on reasonably current understanding of
 what's going on. Great. Super well said. Thank you for being my dean one more time and coming
 on here and sharing your deep expertise with us and helping our viewers here make more informed
 decisions about what's coming and to underline your point there for folks. This is not a good
 time in history to be sitting on the sidelines. So take Dean Spence's advice and start getting
 educated about what's going on there in the AI world. Dean Spence, I can't thank you enough.
 This has been wonderful. Thank you so much for joining us today. Enjoyed it thoroughly. Thanks for
 having me, Adam. Well, folks, and winding things up here, first, I want to thank you for watching the
 very first video on this new Thoughtful Money channel. As the new independent proprietor, I very
 much appreciate your commitment to the content here and it's not every day that you get to talk
 to a Nobel prize-winning economist. I hope you found the discussion useful. To help this channel
 succeed from here, please do me a favor and hit that like button but very importantly click on the
 red subscribe button below as well as that little bell icon right next to it. We want to get the
 subscriber count up here as fast as possible and clicking that little bell will alert you when we
 have new future interviews lined up and actually we've got a bunch coming into the pipeline.
 Especially the next one coming after this one is going to be with Dr. Mark Fauber and if you've seen
 my previous interviews with him, you know that that is not to be missed. If you'd like to see
 who the remaining 20 plus or so experts that we have lined up over the next two months are going
 to be, head over to my sub stack at adamtagert.substack.com. That's where I'll be putting
 out important updates about this channel in the future so go subscribe to that for free when you
 have a moment. I'd like to say thank you so much for joining me, coming over from my old channel,
 watching this video, supporting this new channel, and thank you so much for your time and commitment
 and support and thank you so much for watching today.
