 I think this economy needs a recession.
 There's so much accumulated deadwood. It needs to be gotten rid of. We've got zombie companies, we've got zombie shopping malls, we've got all kinds of things that we need to clear out and recessions do that.
 Welcome to Thoughtful Money. I'm its founder and your host, Adam Taggart.
 There are a lot of narratives flying around right now. Given the recent 5% plus Q3 GDP print, and one of the best November's on record for both stocks and bonds,
 bulls are back to saying, "Everything is awesome again, and 2024 will be a great year for making money." Bears, on the other hand, point to near record levels of overvaluation,
 recessionary leading indicators, and warn the inevitable arrival of the lag effect will see the economy in recession next year and the return of a bear market.
 When sentiment is full of such cross currents, it's prudent to seek the counsel of those who take a cold and calculated look at the data, to see what is versus what our biases may want us to see,
 which is why we're fortunate to speak with macro analyst Wolf Richter of wolfstreet.com today, who will share with us with the charts he regularly compiles or
 telling him about the true state of today's economy and markets. Wolf, thanks so much for joining us today.
 Thanks for having me back, Adam.
 It's always such a pleasure. Welcome here to the new Thoughtful Money channel. This is your first interview on this channel, but you and I have done interviews for many,
 many years in the past. Fun to have you here, though, on the latest incarnation. I got a lot of questions for you, Wolf. You are wonderful at compiling data and really
 trying to give people a very emotion-free status of what's going on in the world, and as I mentioned in the intro, there's a lot of emotion swirling right now, a lot of
 sentiment in both camps. So I want to get into your charts. Before we do, though, if we can just start at a very high level, I want to ask you the question I
 normally ask you at the start of these things. What's your current assessment of the global economy and financial markets?
 That's really tough because the economy in the United States is doing pretty good, but there has been a softening in other places like the European Union and Canada, and of
 course, China's got its own problems, but Japan's doing pretty good. So you have kind of a divergence. Not everybody is running in lockstep. So the amazing thing to me is
 how well the U.S. economy has held up to these higher interest rates. It's surprising to me. In terms of the markets, I want to separate those from the
 economy. We've had really crummy economies and booming markets, and part of the reason for that was the central bank's behavior. So globally, interest rate
 repression and quantitative easing back then, and that drove up the markets, even though the economy itself, not just in the U.S., but in other parts was so-so at best.
 So now we have the opposite. We have central bank tightening all around. We have quantitative tightening in big time in the United States and in Europe and Canada.
 We have interest rates here at five and a half percent roughly on the short term, and so this is something where markets cannot essentially thrive, and so I want to
 separate what's happening in the economy with what's happening in the markets, and obviously markets have peaked. The S&P 500 has peaked in the beginning of January
 last year, the NASDAQ in November 2021, and now they've risen a whole bunch, but they're still below those highs, and so we really need to separate markets,
 which have been incredibly overvalued from the economy itself, which is dealing with a very new set of monetary policies.
 All right, so I'm going to guide this discussion so that near the end we get to the details of your market outlook, but maybe to just jump to the punchline
 really quickly because I think you're intimating it. While the economy, at least in the U.S., is still doing, in your words, pretty good, it sounds like you are
 concerned that the lag effect of all the quantitative tightening and the reversal of monetary policy from what the markets have been used to for the previous
 decade plus may not set the stage for continued market outperformance going forward. Is that a fair thing to say?
 Yeah, I don't see how markets can thrive and boom when there's quantitative tightening. That's just not happening, and we go back to the years when we had
 quantitative easing. That's what drove up the markets. Now we have quantitative tightening, and over the last couple of years, you know, the markets have
 just gone up and down a lot, but they're down from the highs. So I think that's a scenario we will continue to see as long as there's quantitative tightening.
 I don't think the markets can find new highs on a longer-term basis of boom, you know. I mean, the down might get close to a high or touch a high, but yeah,
 these 20, 15, 20% increases a year that we've seen during quantitative easing, they cannot really happen year after year after year.
 When we have quantitative tightening.
 Okay, I'm trying to figure out whether to challenge that now or later. Maybe let's do it now since we're talking about it. So a lot of viewers will say,
 "Okay, Wolf, but we just saw a year of quantitative tightening where the market's actually been up pretty strong and it's, you know, kind of rallying here
 into year end. Doesn't that prove you wrong?" What's your answer to that, but just not sustainable?
 Oh, from the highs. Yeah, so that quantitative tightening doesn't mean that everything has to constantly go down. We had quantitative easing and we had ups and downs,
 but the year after year after year increases when you look at it on a long-term basis, but we're strong. And that rock has been pulled out from out of the market.
 You just don't have that anymore. And so, yeah, there is a whole lot of excess liquidity still in the system.
 So we've had, you know, we've had $5 trillion worth of money printing here in a fairly short time. And we, yeah, we haven't taken out this liquidity from the market.
 So the Fed has. They took out 1.1 trillion, 1.2 trillion so far. And so there is this huge excess of liquidity. So you will see major rallies and you will see that.
 You will see crazy things still happening in the markets. And at the same time, you look at money supply, you look at other measures, you look at the Fed balance sheet,
 the liquidity is getting drained and on a pretty persistent basis. And it just, it's not going to happen overnight. It's not like we're going to have 30-day crash and it's over.
 That's not how I would expect that. I would just expect there to be a very long up and down on a lower trend, on a downward trend of the markets.
 Okay, so let's actually talk about QT then for a bit. So you, don't let me force a script on you, but it sounds like you see similar to me, which I've said many, many times in this program,
 the lag effect will matter over time. But let's see. So you said QT is now going on to use your words, "big time." And I think you just said it's been about 1.2 trillion
 that the Fed has been able to drain off its balance sheet from the all time high. Now we had a gargantuan amount of monetary stimulus that was issued during COVID
 and a gargantuan amount of fiscal stimulus, which is continuing to this day with the deficit spending. And we're going to talk about your drunken sailors problem that you write about a lot.
 How material right now is the tightening relative to the amount of stimulus that was put out there? So to put it in even simpler words, talk a lot with a lot of guests in this program
 about the stimulus pig passing through the Python and a lot of debate on how much of that pig is through the Python at this point in time. Are we at the point where
 tightening is beginning to get into the driver's seat and make a difference? Or is there still just so much of that excess liquidity sloshing around that it still doesn't matter at this point?
 Well, let me just throw that question around a little bit. And if it didn't have quantitative tightening, but we just continued with QE, the markets would have been up by another 40%
 since the beginning of 2022 when they had their highs. So that didn't happen. So the markets are down from their highs. We're looking at it for the NASDAQ, it's been down for over two years.
 And so, yeah, that's something we haven't seen in a long time that the NASDAQ is actually down for over two years from its high. And so this is the effect that quantitative tightening has on markets that are used to quantitative easing.
 And so it's not a big percentage yet of what the Fed has taken off in terms of Treasury securities. The Fed has removed roughly one quarter of those that it bought since March 2020.
 So that's just Treasury securities. The percentage is a little smaller for mortgage backed securities, but then it also did quantitative easing before then.
 And so it really does a lot left to take off the balance sheet. And so I expect this process to take quite a while. We're talking years, it's designed to run in the background, it's designed to be an automatic pilot.
 So yeah, this is not a short term thing. It's a long term thing. We're looking at years.
 Alright, two things. One, we've been using the term QT or quantitative tightening, quantitative easing, just for the folks watching who don't maybe know what those acronyms mean.
 When the Federal Reserve is trying to goose economic growth, it oftentimes will go out and buy assets, and by buying those assets, the money it's using to buy those assets go into the banking system.
 And there's a lot of debate whether it actually makes its way into the final economy or not, but it gives the banks lots of liquidity to then make loans with and do stuff with.
 And when it's buying in a buying spree, that's called quantitative easing, when it's doing the reverse, and it's actually trying to cool the economy off, it basically either sells the assets that it has, or in some cases, if they're bonds, it just holds them to maturity,
 and pretty much, they just go away. And that's called quantitative tightening. So real quick, Wolf, there's been a fair amount of discussion, and recently, George Gammon has been carrying the standard of, the Fed doesn't really matter as much, nearly as much as what the banking system does, both in the US and out in the Eurodollar market.
 And what's interesting this time around is not only is the Fed kind of putting on the economic breaks by doing quantitative tightening and raising interest rates, but the banks are doing a lot less lending. They're really tightening their credit standards, and part of that's just for survival. We had the real cracking of the banking system earlier this year that the Fed had to come in and try to rescue.
 How big of a role is this increase in lending standards tightening of lending playing here in parallel with the Fed?
 Well, what we've seen is lending tightening up in the consumer sector on the subprime side, and that's a small part of consumers. It's not a big part, and we've seen it fairly dramatically in the automotive sector.
 So subprime customers, you're talking about used vehicles, older used vehicles. That's what they can buy with the subprime rated loans, and it doesn't really affect new vehicles because it's only a very small percentage. There's less than 5% of new vehicles that are financed by people with a subprime credit rating.
 And used vehicles, 60% are paid for with cash, so 40% are financed with loans or leases, and of those 40%, around 15% are subprime, and so that 15% or 40%, that has gotten hit pretty hard because subprime rated borrowers have a very hard time not borrowing, but it's a minuscule part of auto sales.
 And we've seen auto sales come up roughly 20% from a year ago. New vehicle sales, used vehicle sales are hanging in there. The used vehicles have the problem of being overpriced, so that's an issue that's unrelated to loans. It's just people are not willing to pay those kind of funds for a used vehicle, and so used vehicle prices are coming down pretty sharply as consumers are reluctant to pay those prices.
 But on the subprime sector, we have definitely seen a tightening. On the prime sector, we have not, in terms of consumers, we have not seen a tightening in terms of commercial loans, the standards, so when you're in commercial real estate, for example, or you're trying to build an office tower, you're not going to be able to borrow funds to do that.
 It's very difficult to borrow funds for retail spaces. Multifamily is a little easier because rents are growing up, and so that's pretty stable, even though we've had a few problems there.
 So you see this in the commercial sector, you see in the real estate part, you see tightening. In terms of companies that have junk credit ratings, there really isn't any tightening.
 They're still able to borrow at relatively low rates, at relatively low spreads, the financial conditions have loosened over the last month, at a record pace really, and they're able to borrow leveraged loans or are hot.
 Investors are jumping on these things, so there really isn't any tightening at that end, and banks are really not lending to junk rated companies that much and keeping those loans on the books. They're lending to lower risk enterprises, and I don't really see any tightening beyond subprime and commercial real estate.
 Okay, so you're basically saying, what I'm taking from that is the bank tightening is really only happening in the lower end of the credit quality scale, and it's still a relatively small fraction of overall loan, so it's not adding that much to the efforts that the Fed is pursuing right now.
 And we see that in the overall financial conditions indices that we have with spreads and lending data and all kinds of things that they're looking at, financial conditions overall just haven't really tightened, they've loosened in the last few months.
 And banks are willing to lend. They're eager to lend. That's how they make the money. It's just they're not going to lend you on a commercial real estate project. If you're trying to build an office tower, you're out, and if you're trying to buy an office tower, you're probably out.
 You have to go to private lending or you have to self fund it or do something, but that's the issue right now in commercial real estate. Of course, that's a pretty big sector for the banking sector and for investors. You're talking multi trillions of dollars. It's not something we can brush off, but that's really where the tightening has occurred and it has occurred dramatically.
 Okay. I'm not saying you are, but for somebody who is expecting a recession to happen next year, I imagine one of the key indicators to be looking at would be lending standards in the junk and levered loan markets.
 What you're saying right now, you're just not seeing tightening there, and I've talked with many guests recently about how the credit spreads are still pretty low in that area of the market.
 So we're not seeing the type of worry or stress in that part of the credit market that we would expect to see if the economy was going to have worse days ahead of it.
 So if you can, in your answer, validate that assumption, and just from the economy standpoint, at the beginning you said the US is doing, I think in your words, pretty good right now.
 Do you expect that pretty good nature to continue, meaning you're not that worried as some others are about the future of the US economy? There are many people I've talked to recently who do think will be going into recession next year.
 Or is this pretty good status that we're in right now, is it untenable, and do you see greater storm clouds ahead? What do you see based on the data you're looking at?
 Well, I mean, anything can happen. But what I'm looking at right now is I see enormous amounts of government stimulus spending, so borrowing money and spending it in the economy, that's very stimulative.
 And that's going on, and I don't see any big change there. Consumers, we call them drunken sailors, but they're the driver of the economy. That's 65% of GDP roughly.
 And consumers are working in record numbers. They're making record amounts of money. They've gotten the biggest pay raises in 40 years. They earn 5.5% on their trillions and trillions of dollars in liquid assets.
 I just looked this up the other day. There's now $3 trillion in CDs that are earning 5.5%, or they're earning a lot, and we have $6 trillion in money market funds, and they're over 5%.
 Consumers are holding all kinds of treasury bills, and they're all over 5%.
 So if you add that up, each trillion dollars that consumers earn 5% on, that's $50 billion a year, and that's cash flow that they're getting. And for retirees, that's cash flow they're spending.
 Retirees received 8.7% Social Security COLAs this year. So they're making 8.7% more than last year, and they're spending most of it. They're not in the savings phase of their lives.
 So you've got this enormous amount of cash flow now coming to consumers. Two years ago, consumers didn't earn anything on their savings, on their money market funds, on the treasury bills.
 They earned zero or close to 0%. The COLAs were really small. There really wasn't much additional income coming to consumers from that end, and now there is a lot of it.
 And on top of the simple fact that we have a record number of people working, getting the biggest pay raises in 40 years, and so this aggregate spending that we're seeing comes from this aggregate increase in income.
 And I posted a chart the other day of this disposable income in real terms adjusted for inflation, and it was up some line of 3.7% year over year.
 So this is after inflation, after taxes. This is income that they're making from all sources, including interest and dividends, and so these income increases spread across all of the consumers, powering the spending, and I don't see that changing.
 Obviously, the Fed could cut rates to zero, and then that would take down the interest income after a while, and we could have some other strange things happen, but I don't see that.
 Right now, I see higher for longer, which means I'm seeing 5% interest rates on the short term for next year, and the COLAs next year are going to be down.
 We're looking at 3.7%, if I remember right, so there's a little bit less than that, and so consumers are going to make more money next year, and I don't see any decline in employment.
 So there may be a slowdown in increases in employment, but I don't see any actual decline in employment when we get that.
 So when we get layoffs that exceed hiring and actual employment comes down, and people are actually getting scared, and fewer people are working, and they're not making any more money, that kind of thing can trigger consumer spending to go backwards.
 But I'm just not, at the data that we have today, I just don't see that, and businesses are still spending, and they're still investing, and that's another big contributor to their economy.
 And we just looked at spending on manufacturing facilities by a company.
 That thing is just going straight up like a rocket, and these companies are investing hugely in production facilities in the United States, at a rate we have never seen.
 So the foundation I would need for a recession, I'm just not seeing that.
 Okay, and I'm just going to show a couple quick charts here. So right here is a chart from your website, Wolf, showing construction spending for manufacturing plants, monthly construction spending, and you're right.
 I mean, it's eye-poppingly bonkers in terms of what its relative amount has been in terms of the past, what is this, two years?
 Back in the early part of the millennium here, it ping ponged between about two and four billion a month.
 It shot from about six billion a month at the end of 2021 up to over 18 billion a month right now, so it's getting close to a triple in just the past two, three years.
 And that's obviously being driven a lot by the inflation reduction act that has a lot of infrastructure spending in it, and what you're calling sort of the drunken sailor phenomenon, and maybe we can just talk about that in just a second.
 I just want to pull up another one of your charts here. Here it is, per capita disposable income, and it does show starting around the end of 2022.
 This is the beginning of this year. Per capita disposable income went from having been negative, even somewhat substantially negative, at least as far as this chart goes back to mid 2022, to being now positive for pretty much the entire year so far.
 And as you said, that's pretty stark contrast where we were just a couple years ago, so consumers, employees at least, are finding more in their pockets from I guess these wage increases, and then you talked all about all the returns that people who have financial assets
 are getting from them in a world of five plus percent T bill rates.
 Let me just throw in here one quick thing we have to keep in mind. In 2021 and 2022, inflation took off, and it took off in a way we hadn't seen in many decades, and it was a scary thing to see, and wages didn't keep up.
 So adjusted for inflation, wages went down in 2021 and 2022, and that's kind of the beginning of the chart there that you showed. This year, wage increases have outrun inflation because inflation has come down a lot.
 And it's no longer at 9%, it's way down, it's come down by half, more than half, and wage increases are now bigger than the rates of inflation. So this is very stimulative to consumption.
 Any time you have this kind of wage increase, these real wage increases, that they're getting plowed into the economy. We've had some really slow spots in consumer spending last year in part because consumers were getting ravaged by inflation, and you saw that.
 The stimulus money ran out and then suddenly inflation took off and the consumers had to rely on their wages, and the interest payments hadn't kicked in, the social security calls weren't that big, and wage increases weren't keeping up with the huge inflation rates.
 So we saw those slowdowns last year, and this year we didn't see any of them.
 You talked about social security, COLA adjustments. There was a pretty big one this year, right?
 8.7%.
 Yeah, okay.
 So, look, there's a lot of other data that I could pull out that shows some weakness in consumer retail sales.
 But for sure, the increase in revolving debt, which is an indicator that many people think is consumers becoming more desperate to make ends meet or just shoving more and more of their lifestyle and the credit card.
 So let me argue with you a little bit about the retail sales. I know a lot of people have kicked that around. But if inflation in goods is not negative, the prices are coming down.
 Used car prices, gasoline prices have plunged, durable goods in general are down. So retail sales are not adjusted for inflation. So when gasoline prices go down 10%, gasoline sales go down 10%.
 People still buy the same amount of gasoline in terms of talents, but they spend less money. So then it looks like gasoline sales going down, but they're going down because prices plunged.
 And we have this across durable goods, and that's a big part of what retailers sell. They don't sell services, they sell durable goods, and the prices went down.
 So even then when you look at the three-month average of retail sales, and that didn't go down actually. Retail sales went up, but they went up a little more slowly despite the price declines.
 And you look at the three-month average, they look pretty good. I don't see any kind of slowdown in retail sales.
 And the month-to-month data is a little bit volatile, and you get some of that every time there's a little slowdown one month, and next month it jumps. So you get this thing.
 That's why I look at it on a three-month average, and there is no slowdown at all. And when we look at consumer spending adjusted for inflation, so the BEA makes these figures available.
 So these are actually inflation adjusted figures. They're up solidly. So there is no slowdown in consumer spending, and it's just not happening.
 I mean, when you start looking at the actual data, it's not happening. I mean, you can try to cherry pick some little thing here and some little thing there, but it's not happening.
 Car sales are up. I mean, that's a big thing, and the prices are down, but the number of unit sales are up and up by a lot. And so once you look at the detailed data, the consumers are not slowing down.
 So that's what I'm trying to dig into here, and I think you've just maybe gotten to the punchline, but there's a lot of data out there like the increase in the revolving credit that I mentioned earlier,
 and a lot of the support, they had the stimulus checks, the stimulus stopped, and then the forbearance programs one by one started getting pulled away,
 and then the student loans went back into repayment, and I think that there's been a logical argument to be made that even though inflation is coming down,
 it doesn't mean prices necessarily are coming down. The cost of living is coming down overall for folks. It just means it's growing less fast, and so the argument has been,
 "Okay, the consumer is finally starting to really feel the full brunt of everything that's gone on from the higher inflation to the higher cost of living and capital and all that stuff,"
 but you're saying, "I'm just looking at the data." The data is not reflecting it. The data is not reflecting a weak or even weakening consumer at this point in time, Wolf.
 Is that true?
 Yeah. A lot of people cited the credit card data. So we were at $1.1 trillion in credit card balance, and I'm going to just throw that out there,
 but credit cards are the universal payment method in the United States. We run $5 trillion a year through credit cards, and we pay for everything, for flights, for everything,
 and so the credit card balances, that's the statement balance, and people spent a gazillion dollars buying stuff with their credit cards because that's online.
 That's what you do. You can't do it any other way, and then they pay it off. They get their 1.5% or 2% cash back, and they pay off their credit card,
 and the credit card debt that's actually interest-bearing is just a small fraction. That is a very small part of the people.
 So most of the people pay off their credit cards every month, but the statement balance is the one that goes into the data,
 so when you pay it off two weeks later, it's a serious balance. That's not in the data. So when we had this huge travel boom over the summer,
 that was all charged to credit cards. Every hotel, every restaurant, every plane ticket, Ubers, all this stuff was charged to credit cards,
 and so we have this large increase in statement balances even though they were paid off the next month.
 So we really haven't seen any increase in interest-bearing credit card debt, and that makes sense because that is a usurious activity,
 and consumers are smart enough to avoid that as much as they can. I'm sure some people get in trouble.
 Some people are way over their head. I mean, the subprime is always in trouble. That's why the subprime, there's a reason for that,
 but it's a very small thing, but the vast majority of Americans that have huge amounts of credit card borrowing capacity left,
 so you look at the account maximums versus the statement balances, and we're at a record $4 trillion gap there,
 and they're not borrowing. They're using their credit card to pay for stuff, and so credit cards are an indication of their payment tracking.
 They're an indication of spending, not an indication of debt, and so I want to throw that out because when we have high credit card balances,
 it means consumers are spending. During the pandemic when credit card balance is plunged, consumers weren't spending.
 They didn't go on trips, so there was no travel spending. They didn't go to concerts. They didn't go to football games.
 They didn't do anything where they used their credit cards for outside of buying stuff online, so it's not like they paid off their debts.
 They didn't. They stopped spending on stuff that they used to pay with their credit cards, and so once you start digging into all these data points,
 I mean, it comes down to the fact that consumers are not over indebted, and I looked at the various debt measures compared to the disposable income,
 and they're not over indebted. They're fairly low levels, the debt levels, and they're very reasonable. I call them drunken sailors,
 but they're really not drunken sailors. They're making record amounts of money. Record number of people are working.
 Biggest pay increase is 40 years. They're five and a half percent of their cash investments, their colas, all that stuff, so they're spending the money,
 and they're saving some. They're still saving. Consumers are still saving. They're not spending all of the money they're making,
 so we still have a positive savings rate, and they're putting their money aside or doing something else with it,
 so I just cannot see the weakness in consumer spending. I can't see it.
 Okay, and this is great. That's why I had you on here. Two things to get you to react to. One is if they're able to pay off those balances every month,
 totally agree. It doesn't matter how big the balances are. If they can afford to pay them off, they're doing okay.
 What's been happening with the delinquency rates? I don't know, but I'm curious if you know. Are we seeing any spike up in that or not?
 Yeah, so they plunged during the pandemic when people got stimulus money, but we're looking at subprime here, so that's the subprime sector.
 That's what the delinquencies are in auto loans. That's what the delinquencies are in credit cards, and we've looked at that data,
 and in auto loans, the subprime delinquencies are now very high, but they're always high, but they're now at record levels,
 and that's a minuscule part of auto lending and usually only impacts older used vehicles. The prime delinquency rates on auto loans are super minuscule.
 They're at historic lows. They're like at 0.2% or something, and they're essentially nonexistent. The same with credit cards.
 The subprime is in trouble. The subprime is always in trouble. They got out of trouble during the pandemic when they got the stimulus money.
 Now they're back in trouble like they were before the pandemic. They're back in whether they were in 2019, so it's just normal at the subprime level to have these high delinquencies.
 That's a very profitable business subprime, so that's why lenders doing often specialized lenders. They're not necessarily banks,
 but specialized lenders that get into subprime auto loans and credit cards, and they're charging huge amounts of interest.
 It's a high-risk, high-profit business, and they took a lot of risks in the last few years, and some of these specialized auto loan or subprime used car dealers.
 They're big chains that sell used vehicles and they fund them with subprime loans that are then securitized and sold as asset-backed securities,
 and several of those used car chains have now collapsed, gone bankrupt, and they're strictly subprime-focused dealers.
 They were owned by a private equity firm, so we see there is a problem in subprime, and it's a small part, and that's where banks are tightening,
 and that's where consumers are always in trouble, and they got out of trouble during the pandemic, but they're not getting back into trouble,
 and so that is there, but it's just a small part.
 Got it, yeah, and subprime, you can look at it as a leading indicator, which is that the weaker players on the chessboard fail first,
 and maybe we're starting to see more trouble there, but you're saying so far no contagion into higher up more quality consumer categories.
 Last question on this, then we'll move on. You mentioned the savings rate, that it's "still positive," I think were your words.
 Having talked to David Rosenberg the other week, one of the factors and why he thought the recession that he expected to happen in 2023
 didn't happen, and he thinks will happen next year, is that consumers just stopped saving a lot less, and so they brought the savings rate down.
 Still positive, but well below historical norms, and he said that that has acted as a true stimulus to the economy.
 So are there any worries on your part about the fact that while still positive, the savings rate is still quite low relative to historic means?
 Well, so it's around 3.8% or something, around 4%. Before the pandemic, it was a little over 5% range. Before the financial crisis, it was lower than what it is now.
 So historically, it's kind of in that range, and American consumers are not known for the savings.
 You hear about Asian countries having savings rates of 10% or whatever. That's never happened in the United States.
 Americans like to splurge. They're not really big into savings, and so a 3.8% savings rate would have been great before the Great Recession.
 That would have been a lot, and now it's a little lower than it was in 2018, 2019. So it's in that classic American range that we've had for decades,
 and the savings rate means that consumers are spending less than they're earning. That doesn't mean they're putting this money in the savings account.
 It just means that's the difference between what they earn from all sources except capital gains, and so you have this other issue that home prices have gone up
 and stocks have gone up over the many years, and so that's not included in the savings rate. That's excluded from it.
 What's included in the savings rate is interest income and dividend income, rental income, income from wages and those kinds of things,
 and they're in the typical American range, which means consumers are making more money than they're spending,
 and as long as they make more money than they're spending, we can sustain the levels of spending.
 It's when they drop below that and they're starting to actually have negative savings rates, which we occasionally have during recessions and stuff,
 then spending is not sustainable.
 Okay, alright, and thanks for going through all this with me in detail here, but I just wanted to put the period on what I believe to be one of your
 key points right now, which is the economy actually is in pretty good shape, again, using your terms there, pretty good,
 where it's two thirds consumer driven economy and the consumer is doing well given what the data is saying here.
 So for those that are expecting recession to arrive early next year, and just to be super transparent,
 I would say the majority of people I've interviewed over the past month on this channel will think that that's probably the more likely scenario,
 so you're a little bit of an outlier here, which is why I really wanted you to flush out your position here, but consumers are doing okay.
 You're not seeing any real concerning signs in the data, at least not yet, and companies are doing okay.
 We haven't talked about this yet, but many of them locked in low cost of debt when they could, so they're surviving off of that,
 and there's all this government fiscal stimulus still going into the system. So I believe you would say, economically speaking,
 you're not worried about 2024. Markets, perhaps a different story, but economic growth wise, I don't detect any real worry for you for next year.
 I don't see anything in the data that tells me we're going to get a recession. We can get a recession.
 I mean, we always get a recession at some point. It's part of the business cycle, and I think this economy needs a recession.
 It really needs a recession. There's so much accumulated deadwood. It needs to be gotten rid of.
 We've got zombie companies. We've got zombie shopping malls. We've got all kinds of things that we need to clear out, and recessions do that.
 And recessions tend to get rid of inflation. So I think aside from the personal tragedy that a recession does to people when they lose their jobs,
 the two or three million people that might lose their job in a recession, a recession is a natural thing of a healthy business cycle.
 So we need one. We need a recession. We need a business cycle recession. When we had the pandemic, that wasn't a business cycle recession.
 That was a lockdown and a pandemic that really didn't do what a business cycle recession does. It just triggered a whole bunch of stupid stimulus.
 We need a business cycle recession, and not a steep one, not a bad one, but one that's long enough to where we can get rid of some of the deadwood.
 But I'm not seeing it, so I just don't see the data for that.
 Okay, so first off, I completely agree with you that ideally, I think both you and I would love to see the US economy restored to a healthy boom bust
 cycle. You don't want the booms to get too crazy. You don't want the bust to get too bad, and the more you let those happen naturally,
 the more you live in sort of a healthy range. It's only when you intervene and create distortions and deformations that you get overly prolonged
 booms that then lead to really bad busts, and you're basically saying, "I'd love to see a recession because it will help kind of right size the system."
 You're nodding as I'm saying all this, but despite the logic of wanting to see one for those reasons, you're not seeing that in the data of something
 that looks like it's going to happen anytime soon.
 Right. I'm just not seeing it. I've been looking forward for 18 months.
 Okay, I want to get to your market outlook in just a moment. Just to tick off a few other things here, though, you talked about how inflation has
 come down a lot. When I talked to you a year ago, you were one of the first people I talked to once we were starting to come down off of the 9% CPI
 saying, "Hey, look, goods prices likely to disinflate pretty aggressively from here, but services are going to be what proves to be sticky."
 I think that's been the case. Even though we've come down from 9% to 3% on CPI, what's been driving it has largely been services.
 Where do you see inflation going from here as we're heading into 2024?
 Yeah, I'm ready for surprises coming from inflation. I mean, the data we were seeing in the goods sector, that's good. That's encouraging.
 So, many goods prices are actually coming down, so food excluded, and that's an issue. Food prices spiked, and then they plateaued for a little while
 and dipped a little bit, and now they're coming back up. So, that's an issue. In terms of energy, though, those prices have plunged.
 Durable goods and non-durable goods like clothing and shoes, they're on a downward trend in electronics, cars, all kinds of other stuff.
 They're not growing with inflation meaning not slowing, but with actually inflation being negative, so with prices actually coming down,
 and that's encouraging, and that can't go on forever.
 So, price deflation in those categories.
 Yeah, right. There's deflation in those categories, and obviously that cannot persist forever. Those goods prices are going to work off.
 Some of the horrible spike that they went through a couple of years ago, I mean, it was just horrible. Used cars went up 55% in a year,
 and it's just completely nuts, and they're working that off now, but they will probably not drop back to where they were in 2019.
 They'll probably work off maybe a third or maybe a little more than a third, and then they'll stabilize and maybe start going back up again.
 So, that's in the goods sector. That's great. That's the shortages-inspired inflation that is now turning into deflation,
 and that's in part, I think, why the economy is so strong because people are encouraged by this.
 When you go to the pump and it just sucks all the money out of your wallet that you got, that's discouraging,
 but now the prices are back down, and outside the grocery stores where people can buy, the stupid addendum stickers on new cars have vanished.
 Instead of getting, when you shop for a pickup truck, instead of seeing an MSRP plus $15,000, you may see MSRP minus $10,000,
 and that's a whole different shopping environment. Services is the thing that it's come down, meaning the increases are less.
 Housing or rents are still going up at over 6% year over year.
 They're not really slowing down that much. They're kind of stuck at that 6% increase right now in the last six months.
 Other services like insurance have come up, and they're hot, and there's recreational services, those kind of things.
 Services inflation is just really tough, and I'm waiting for some really bad surprises to come at us.
 We've had them before. We can expect bad surprises.
 Sorry to interrupt, but do you think the surprises are more likely to be to the upside, like it's running away to the upside again?
 Well, we had some downside surprises too, some good surprises.
 Yeah, but when you're talking about them in services, are you expecting more to the up or down?
 We've had some good surprises to the downside, so I expect that to reverse, because we always get these head fakes in inflation.
 Powell said that too. I mean, they're expecting head fakes, and yeah, I've been talking about head fakes for a year,
 and we've been getting them in both directions, and so I don't think the inflation fight is over.
 We've come down, and I don't think we go back to the 9% inflation, but I don't think we're heading back to 2%.
 I think the services we'll see too will stay higher than that.
 Okay, I'm going to try to pull up a chart here, Wolf, from your website again, which is as the Fed has hiked aggressively to try to contain
 inflation, we've seen the cost of debt really skyrocket, and we've seen the cost of servicing the US federal debt really zoom a lot
 higher. So I'm showing here a chart from one of your recent posts, US government interest payments as a percentage of tax receipts,
 and we can see that over really just the past year, year plus, we went from somewhere around 20% to now maybe over 35% for sure.
 So on a percentage basis, a really big increase, maybe like a 75% increase percentage wise in terms of how much it's costing us to service this.
 This isn't the highest it's ever been. The chart here that you show, which goes back to the late 70s, shows that in the 80s and early 90s
 it was like up above, a little bit above 50%, but certainly this is pitching a lot of people's attention. We certainly have a lot more federal
 debt out in the world now, an awful lot more federal debt out in the world than they had then. How much of a concern is this and how much of
 this is a limiting factor to monetary policy if at some point we get to the point where servicing our debt is just chewing up all the
 available income? Well, back in the 80s and 90s when we had that big pile of, you see that on the chart that you showed when interest payments took
 up over 50% of tax revenues, the Fed didn't react to that and it's kind of the other way around almost. There is only one discipline, possibly only one
 discipline, maybe not even that, but possibly only one discipline that can get Congress to do its job and deal with the deficit and that's interest payments.
 And when it gets to the point that half of the tax revenues go into interest, then Congress is maybe a little bit more motivated to stop grandstanding
 on it and to actually do something about it. And I think the Fed understands that if it tries to play this game of making it easier to overborrow,
 then we'll get to the point where it's no longer manageable. We'll get to a point where Argentina is or some of these other countries where you have
 140% inflation because the government essentially tasked the central bank with providing the funds for deficit spending and that's what you have in
 Argentina. Argentina has a central bank that's part of the finance ministry and they're just providing the funding for the deficit spending and so you have
 140% inflation. That's not something anybody in the United States wants to do and at the same time it's very hard to get any kind of discipline out of
 Congress when money has been free for so long and that didn't really matter when you don't pay interest on it and so now suddenly it matters and there needs
 to be a rethink in Congress, there needs to be a rethink in the White House, and interest expenses I think is the only discipline that can force
 that to happen.
 Okay, that's the boogeyman that basically maybe actually scare our elected leaders into actually doing the right thing. What does all this mean in terms of
 it looks like they're going to have an unprecedented three years of declines. Well, they have a fourth year of declines from here. Are we in a new
 paradigm or what do you see going forward for bond yields?
 Yeah, so the bond market, if you look at the Treasury market, it's very volatile and if you look at a 10-year, a chart of the 10-year yield of the
 U.S. Treasury 10-year yield and I like posting to them, the current, the drop in long-term yields that we've seen over the last month, it's smaller than a
 bunch of the others we've seen in this uptrend of yields. So this hasn't broken any records downward. This is something we get a lot, the 10-year
 yield jumps a lot, a lot, and then it gets everybody scared and then at that point there's a rally and the bond prices rise and yields drop, but only partially
 and then they start rising again and it forms the six-act pattern with an upward trend and that six-act pattern is still intact. So I just don't
 expect long-term bond yields. I mean right now the market is wanting to push bond yields lower and everybody is talking about the Fed is going to do
 a rate cut the first quarter, that kind of thing and the Fed is saying no. So the Fed is saying we're arguing over whether to hike or cut, whether
 to hike rates or hold and the bond market sees only rate cuts and so I think the bond market is going to be wrong and it has been wrong all the way
 along and it continues to be wrong probably for a while and so I expect long-term yields to go higher again from where they drop to and at some point
 long-term yields will be above short-term yields. Short-term yields are at 5.5%. So this often happens when short-term yields drop because the Fed
 is right and then you have the long-term yields up here because the short-term yields have been cut to here. So right now we have the
 short-term yields here and the long-term yields here and what we've seen is that the difference has lessened and the long-term yields fell again
 and then I expect them to rise above the short-term yields and that would mean a 10-year yield above 5%, about 5.5% and mortgage rates roughly
 in the same range where they've been. Mortgage rates have already risen in an appropriate manner with short-term yields. They're already above,
 they're between 7% and 8%. So that's kind of what I see. I don't really envision long-term yields to go down a lot. I think this economy is
 running really well. Inflation is at these yields. Inflation is still strong. I just don't see that old environment of 2% or 3% 10-year yields
 or less than that. We've had a half a percent yield on the 10-year yield and I just don't see that coming back.
 Alright, so let me ask you this then. So it sounds like you think the inverted yield curve that we have right now will eventually
 uninvert but it's going to uninvert mostly because of a bear steepening of the long end of the yield curve, meaning that's going to rise
 and then eventually go above today's short-term yields versus the short-term yields coming down because of change in Fed policy or whatever.
 It's when the inflation or something breaks and it has to scramble. So you're basically saying, "No, you think it's going to be that bear
 steepening and we're going to have rates across the yield curve from 5% to higher on the longer end and the economy is strong enough it's
 going to hang in there." I've talked to people who said, "You know what? This economy was addicted to zerp or close to it and there's no way
 it can sustainably survive at cost of debt of 5%. A lot of people don't think it could sustainably survive at cost of debt of 3%, right?
 But you don't seem to be sweating it very much.
 Well, it's surprising. I was surprised when I saw us go through the second half of 2022 without a recession. I mean, how could that happen?
 We were picking up interest rates like that and we had some slow points in 2022 and I thought, "Okay, that might be the beginning of a recession."
 This year, we've got 5% interest rates and the economy has picked up and this is surprising. I don't think many people expected that, but that's what it is.
 I don't expect us to get back to the growth rate that we had in the third quarter of 5.2% or whatever that is and that's very unusual.
 The average growth rate for the United States is just under 2%, so I think that's what we're really looking at is long-term around 2%.
 I think the fourth quarter, if you get to 2% growth, it will be good. Next year, if you have 2% growth, it will be good.
 This is average. It's the kind of thing that the U.S. economy does and I wouldn't expect that kind of booming 5% growth rate again, but it happened in Q3.
 We get all these bizarre surprises that nobody expected and that's what we get.
 Okay, so I'm going to kind of wind up the economy part of this conversation and if it looks like we're going to run a little bit long here,
 I hope that's okay just because I want to get to your market outlook as well and do that justice.
 I would consider you, I guess, maybe a reluctant bull on the economy, meaning the data you're showing you is making you bullish
 that the economy seems to be doing okay and looks like it's probably going to do okay for a while from here.
 I put the reluctant in there because of you saying, "Hey, what we really need is a recession to normalize things."
 So if you feel I've mischaracterized you, please let me know, but if I haven't, let's trundle over to housing for a moment here.
 You publish frequent charts showing, well, initially showing the distortions of pricing in a lot of housing metros across the U.S.
 and in a few other countries and I think you call them the splendid housing bubbles that were blown over the past 10 years or so.
 Most of them seem to be past peak at this point in time, but I'm curious because you track this data so closely,
 where do you see housing prices going from here?
 So this goes into the basket of overall asset prices which were incredibly inflated through the monetary policies,
 quantitative easing, low interest rates that we've had since 2008 really and so they have over time done an incredible job
 inflating these asset prices and they've gone out of whack with the fundamentals.
 So in housing, the median incomes is one of the fundamentals that we're looking at and so we've had these huge price increases in housing
 and median incomes went up a little bit, but not like that and rents went up a little bit, but not like that.
 So when you compare and the rent is a big fundamental for the housing market.
 When you look at these things, you realize this is on a separate track from the economy.
 If you get a huge number of layoffs, that's going to be an additional problem to the housing market,
 but the housing market has a problem of its own making which is too high prices after too many years of low interest rates
 and now we have much higher mortgage rates. The whole thing doesn't make sense anymore.
 Home builders have already come to grips with that. So the median prices of new houses are down 18%.
 They've lowered their prices and they've given basically mortgage relief.
 We don't even see the mortgage rate balance in the prices so they've cut the prices of the homes they're selling.
 Really they've become realistic selling smaller homes with fewer amenities, with cheaper finishes, etc.
 Or do you have a product that people can't afford at these mortgage rates and then they're buying down their mortgage rates.
 So they understand, they have to build and sell homes. They can't walk away from this market.
 Home owners have walked away from this market saying, "I'm going to wait." And they think, "This too shall pass."
 And they're just going to sit there and not put the home on the market.
 They have making homes that they should have sold when they bought their new home,
 but they haven't because they wanted to write up the market all the way.
 So now we're seeing some of that. We're seeing the new listings are coming up.
 So now they're higher than they were a year ago. So people are starting to realize.
 So maybe the prices really don't go up any further and making home is very high carrying costs.
 So we see the dynamic starting to work out and some markets' home prices are down a lot and others are still up.
 So it's market by market.
 But this is a dynamic that is unrelated to the overall economy but is related to the inflated home prices
 and the higher interest rates and the simple fact that people cannot afford those homes and refuse to pay for them.
 So that assumes that the economy is doing pretty good. I think home prices will continue to head lower.
 Okay. So you think home prices are set to head lower even if we stay here at steady state?
 They are only down nationally, I don't know, like a percentage point or something like that?
 If they even are at this point in time, I think it's ping pong back and forth between flat and down just a tiny bit nationally?
 Yeah. So whatever measure we're looking at, there are all kinds of different measures.
 But for example, the National Association of Realtors median price, the peak was in June 2022.
 So that was a year and a half ago. That's the first time since the financial crisis that we did not establish a new high this year.
 So the peaks occur every June and this June was below last June.
 So we're down 5% roughly from that peak. Then we have the 20 City Case Shiller Index. That's down just a hair.
 There are other indexes that use the federal housing administration's price index and they use mortgage data.
 So that's a very select group of houses, the houses that are bought with government backed mortgages.
 That index continues to go up and doesn't show the decline.
 And then there's the Case Shiller National Index, which uses its 20 City Case Shiller Index plus the mortgage data from the government.
 And so that's up a little bit based on the mortgage data, which is up quite a bit.
 So depending on, but it's true, the data is so close in terms of how far it's fallen or risen that different indices will give you either red or green line.
 And it really hasn't moved much. I mean, that's in itself, it's a change that we haven't really seen any year-over-year increase.
 And it's from the peak. We're kind of at the peak or we're a little bit below the peak or a little bit above the peak.
 The peak was being 2022.
 Right. So the momentum is now gone. The rocket is not just continuing to go higher. It's now sort of stuck where it's been.
 You think it's going to start coming back down. I kind of got two questions for you, which is steady state, economy continues chugging along the way it's been.
 What type of correction do you think is coming in the housing market? Mild, five to 10% ish, whatever.
 And then if we get a recession where you have job losses, I think that's one of the things that would really unfreeze this housing market
 because we basically have a frozen market at this point in time where transactions are just super low because people are sitting it out, like you said.
 That obviously could have a lot more gravity on that rocket. So in both scenarios, steady state and then recession,
 which are kind of finger to the wind guesstimate of the type of correction that folks you think should be at least keeping themselves open to in their minds?
 Well, one thing I'm starting to think about is if we have, say, 10 years of continued economic growth in the range that we've seen, with continued inflation in the range that we've seen
 and continued wage increases in the range that we've seen, so in the four wage increases and inflation, the 4%, 5% range and no economic downturn,
 I think we could see 10 years of slightly declining, wobbling lower home prices until wages are at a point, the rising wages reach a point where these homes become more affordable.
 We've had periods like that before where there's a long-term downturn, but it's not dramatic, it's not a plunge, but it takes 10 years and everybody's losing a little bit every year.
 I've just been a big part of my life in Tulsa, Oklahoma. There are different cities and Tulsa, Oklahoma back then had a huge boom in home prices and then a collapse and they stayed down and they're still down.
 And then now they've come up, the last year they've come up, but they're still among the cheapest in the country. And so city by city, this has different dynamics.
 And the reason why Tulsa was such a poor housing market for decades is because it used to be an oil boom town and then the oil business moved to Houston and it kind of went into a depression.
 And so we've got to remember city by city, it's going to be different. And we're looking at the overall economy in the United States, I think, with all these different cities washing out.
 There is a possibility that we will see long-term downtrends in housing prices until the long-term uptrend in wages make these home prices more affordable and reasonable and then that may be the bottom on that part.
 So that's an option that we have. If you get an economic change or if something happens, if inflation becomes bigger, interest rates go even higher, I think there's a possibility we can see more dramatic downturns.
 If there's a big recession, it can change all kinds of things. So I wouldn't want to speculate on what happens to the housing market if we have a big long recession. I don't think that's going to be very good, but the recession in the United States tends not to be very long.
 And they're two or three quarters and they tend not to be bad. So in my lifetime we had two bad ones, the double dip in the early 1980s and the great recession. The pandemic really wasn't a recession, that was a lockdown.
 The pandemic, it wasn't a business cycle recession. I was like, oh, you don't count that. And the other recessions were fairly short, fairly mild and unless you lost your job, you didn't really notice they were there.
 You just kept working and kept making money and kept spending money and nothing really changed. It's just you knew some people maybe who lost their jobs and had trouble finding a job.
 So in that environment, if you get a really hard recession, I doubt that. But if we do, there could be quite a bit of child relations in the housing market.
 Okay, so I take from what you said there is, if you're looking at getting into real estate now, don't expect to have the wonderful tailwind that the housing market has enjoyed for say the past almost 20 years, with the exception of the global financial crisis there for a little bit.
 So don't count on the same type of appreciation that we've had. And if you are a real estate owner, just prepare yourself, perhaps for a period of going forward of more sort of sideways stagnation.
 But man, if there's something like a recession that gets thrown into the mix, then things could get a lot more squirrely.
 Right. Okay. All right. Now we're at the last topic here, which is your market outlook for next year. And as you told us at the very beginning, markets in the economy aren't necessarily the same thing.
 They've kind of gone in a lockstep more often than not in past years with the endless amount of QE and intervention that we had following the global financial crisis.
 But it sounds like you're saying they're at a point right now where they could diverge pretty substantially next year, so you're reluctantly bullish on the economy. Sounds like maybe you're a bit more bearish on the markets themselves.
 What type of assets do you favor for the road ahead and are there any that you just wouldn't touch? Sounds like maybe long bonds you probably wouldn't touch because it seems like you think that yields are going higher for those.
 Well, I'm not too far away from seeing long bonds as attractive to nibble on, or at least I was until the recent drop in yield.
 So when the 10-year yield reaches 5% and I'm looking at inflation being and the future being maybe between 4% and 6%, at some point the long bonds might become attractive.
 I'm not going too far away from that. It's a corporate bond, so there's another issue that we're facing next year and we thought we'd face it this year and we didn't face it.
 So we might face it next year and we might not, and that's a credit issue and that impacts bonds.
 Companies are still flush with cash and risky companies could still borrow this year, but there are signs that we're going to see more major defaults coming up next year in the corporate bond segment.
 There were signs in 2022, we're going to see those in 2023 and we really didn't and outside of the real estate sector. And so we're talking about Treasury securities but also corporate bonds. Corporate bonds earn more money and so that's really not a bad place to be sometimes.
 But we expect, I expect to be more credit issues next year, so that's an issue with corporate bonds. You don't have that issue with Treasuries.
 And is that because of the lag effect that these companies' debts beginning to mature and rerate at much higher rates?
 Right. So they went out with gusto and borrowed huge amounts of money when the rates were low but didn't really spend all this money.
 So they invested in Treasury securities and now they have this cash and they extended the maturity walls and that we've seen that the time that these bonds mature has been moved out.
 But next year we're starting to run into some of these bonds that need to be refinanced by weaker companies.
 So, you know, if you see a cascade of junk bond defaults, then junk bond yields will go up quite a bit and it will be harder for other companies to refinance their junk bonds.
 And that's a cycle that usually comes at around this time. It hasn't. I expected eventually it's going to come.
 So in terms of bonds, in terms of corporate bonds, that's something to keep your eyes on. With Treasuries, you don't have that problem.
 With Treasuries, I think, personally, I think a 10 or 20-year Treasury security that yields 6% would be a very good buy. I don't like them at 4.5%.
 Yeah, but when they get up, and we've seen that, they went over 5% and that's a huge amount of buying. And that just exploded. I mean, the buying just took off and so the yields went back down and prices went back up.
 And so we need to, from my taste, we need to get over that. So that 5% buying needs to be eaten up and then we need to go higher in terms of why I see inflation.
 Long bonds, you're getting killed when there's a lot of inflation with long bonds. Your hope is that your interest payments will compensate you for the inflation, for the duration of the bond, plus some additional.
 And so when inflation is 5% or 6% in a year buying a bond that's for 10 or 20 years and then the yield is 3%, you're praying that inflation goes back to 2% or 1% very quickly or else you're going to really lose money on this thing.
 And so I wasn't too far away from feeling pretty good about longer bonds. In terms of stocks. I just don't see that, you know, I just, I don't like them. They're overvalued.
 The indices have been carried by just a handful of huge stocks. They're hugely overvalued. A lot of thousands of smaller stocks have all gotten completely crushed.
 And I've got a good collection of those in my employed stocks column. And I mean 80%, 90% down and we've got countless numbers of those and that's happened. And so if you take out the big, the magnificent seven, you know, the markets look a lot weaker.
 And I just, I just don't like, I just don't like stocks at this point. It's just, I just can't see it. And I'm happy being in short term stuff right now. I'm just waiting and see what develops.
 Okay. I'm just going to ask about gold only because it hit a new all time high, the trading day right before we're recording here. Wolf, any particular thoughts about gold?
 Well, I'm in the camp where gold is something that long term investors do. And on one hand, and on the other hand, day traders and or people that use quick trades to make money on movements.
 I don't, so both, both I think are valid. And it's good to have gold as part of a long term portfolio.
 At the same time, I'm not in the camp where I believe that everything's going to implode and gold is the only thing that's going to keep you alive. And I think that wouldn't be a reason for me to own or buy gold.
 And I think if you put a portion of your portfolio in gold and just forget about it.
 That's, yeah, that's, it's prudent.
 Okay. So, and I should have asked about just sort of general commodities too, especially because your economic outlook is pretty sanguine.
 So presumably that means there would be a demand for economies, commodities to power that economy. And a lot of those commodity producers have been in the stocks that have gotten really pretty beaten up a lot recently.
 Does that sector interest you at all, or do you just not want to touch any equity right now, given how you see the landscape?
 Yeah, so I mean, commodities are, you have to, this is short term stuff, you know, you look at all these commodity prices we've seen, lithium and oil and natural gas and a different, I mean, you can go through the list, and they have seen huge spikes
 by 1000% or whatever, during a year or two, and now those spikes have collapsed. And so you can make a lot of money and you can blow a lot of money gambling with commodities like that.
 And that's great. I mean, that's something if you want to do that, I'm all for it, you know, have some fun with commodities.
 The commodities are just not a long term investment in terms of the commodities themselves. The companies that produce them, I think if you're ready for some volatility.
 And then there's changes too that happened, and we have in the United States, we've seen a decline in gasoline.
 They sort of plateaued for many years and now they're declining. We've seen, you know, new technologies coming out that EV batteries can use, where lithium gets eliminated or reduced.
 I mean, that's really bad if you're in a company that's producing lithium. So you've got these kinds of things and, I mean, people say inflation will cause commodities to spike and we've seen that, we've seen a spike, but then commodities collapse because with commodities,
 the solution to high prices are high prices. High prices bring up more production and then there's a glutton prices come down and that's what we see. So this is just a --
 commodities are widow makers. If you trade them, be ready to go on a roller coaster. And in terms of the companies that produce them, I mean, they go right with them to some extent.
 Okay, alright. Well, thanks. Well, if you've given us so much time, thank you for that. I'm going to start wrapping things up, but I am going to, since we've gone so long, I'm going to see if we can go just a tiny bit longer with you.
 In a moment, I'm going to ask you a question and I'm going to make you the first guinea pig here. I was thinking it might be nice to add to these interviews when they close to ask the guests who have been giving us all of their insights on
 the financial and monetary side of wealth building to ask the question, "Is there anything else that's not monetary that you would counsel people start investing more in right now
 just to live a rich life?" So I'm going to come to you with that question in just a second, but real quick, I just want to ask the audience here, folks, if you've enjoyed this discussion with Wolf,
 would like to see him come back on the program in early 2024 to give us an update if his charts are telling him an unfolding story on the ground that we should know about then, please vote your support for that by hitting the like button
 and then clicking on the red subscribe button below, as well as that little bell icon right next to it and I do want to remind folks that while this Thoughtful Money channel is still new,
 the subscriber count really does matter and a higher subscriber count helps us burn more brightly on the YouTube algorithm, so you'll really be helping us out by hitting that subscribe button.
 Secondly, I want to remind folks that I'm providing lots of information about the whole new Thoughtful Money movement over on my substack and you can sign up to it for free.
 You can get just about all that information for free. What I have started doing as a reward for those folks that have been chipping in to help support the new Thoughtful Money venture is if you become a premium subscriber on my substack,
 and it's not much, it's like $8 a month, you will get access to my Adam's Notes, which I have started back up again, and those are my detailed takeaways of each of these in-depth interviews.
 So if you want to get my notes, including this one of this interview with Wolf, just go to AdamTaggart.substack.com. Alright Wolf, coming back to you here, hopefully you've had a minute or two to chew on that question.
 What is a non-financial investment that you would encourage people to make if they're just looking to have a better tomorrow than they currently are today?
 Well, of course, you beautifully caught me off guard with that. Yeah, I know, I appreciate you being willing to do that.
 So, I mean, this is my personal thing, and everybody has to do their own, but I think doing whatever you can to stay fit and healthy is absolutely crucial.
 And some of the things we can control, and some of the things we can't control, but the things that we can control, so eating the right food, exercising, trying to sleep.
 Well, I'm a bad sleeper, so that's kind of the thing that I struggle with, and you're just looking at the financial aspect of being unhealthy, it's ruinous.
 Yeah, the medical and insurance expenses are such in this country that it is ruinous to be unhealthy.
 And to be healthy means you have all kinds of financial opportunities with the healthcare system.
 For example, we've had this for many years since President Bush came up with it in 2006, I believe, 2005, health savings accounts, like an IRA, you can save money in it.
 And if you don't go to the doctor, this money just accumulates tax-free. So these are the financial benefits of being healthy.
 And it's just a beautiful life when you're healthy, and it can be very miserable when you're not.
 So that's one of the things I've been following all my life, and I've stumbled and I've had my own issues, but that's what I like.
 All right. Well, health is true. Well, people have heard me say that many times on this channel. I appreciate you starting this whole potential new series
 with one of these ones that's incredibly important, and it's not just financially ruinous if you're not healthy, but it is quality of life ruinous.
 Maybe in the extreme, if you're so unhealthy, you actually die. It's the absolute worst kind of ruin you could deal with, but it's also a great quality of life enhancer.
 It's what lets us age gracefully and be able to play with our grandchildren and travel and enjoy life and all that type of stuff.
 And it's never too late to start, and it doesn't matter what you do. It just matters you find something that you like doing that is conducive to your health
 and your fitness and start doing it. And Wolf, if I recall correctly, you're a swimmer. That's a big part about how you get your exercise?
 Yeah, I'm a swimmer now. I've swim since high school, but I used to be kind of a competitive athlete and cycling and running, and I've paid my price.
 I can't really run anymore. I can jog a little bit, but I can't really run anymore. And so I jog, and I swim a lot, and I lift weights,
 and I go hiking and skiing, cross-country skiing, skate skiing, and kayaking. I'm an outdoorsy kind of person, so I swim in the San Francisco Bay.
 You're one of those crazy people that get into that freezing shark infested bay.
 Not shark infested, really. We don't really see a lot of sharks, but we see sea lions and seals and that kind of stuff and pelicans. It's beautiful.
 Which sharks eat, but anyways, go ahead.
 Which sharks eat. We see it on the videos. We don't actually personally run into them generally, hopefully.
 All right. Well, look, thanks for doing that. Well, folks, I hope you like that. If you want me to ask this question of more guests in the future,
 please let me know in the comments section below, and if we haven't taken up too much of your time already watching this extended interview
 with Wolf, I just published a great one with Michael Pinto over the weekend. I'll put up a link to it right here. Wolf, thanks so much.
 Everybody else, thanks so much for watching.
