 And the problem is, if that does happen, I am genuinely, genuinely frightened. I want to be
 abundantly clear about that. Frightened by what it would mean to try another four or five years
 of the same old crap, particularly if that comes alongside slashing interest rates back down to
 zero again. All the things we've tried and failed. We try them again now when you've got inequality
 where it is, where you've got political polarization where it is, where you have
 institutional failure like Harvard at the level it is now. I don't know if we can recover from that.
 Welcome to Thoughtful Money. I'm its founder and your host, Adam Taggart. In my recent interview
 with Felix Zulauf, he mentioned that we're shifting from a unipolar world order into a
 multipolar world disorder. The majority of folks who watch this Thoughtful Money channel are
 primarily from the US, Europe, and Australia. So to provide a perspective from outside the West's
 point of view, I'm pleased to welcome Michael Every back onto the program. Michael is global
 strategist at Rabobank and he's based out of Singapore. Michael, thanks so much for taking time
 out of your busy morning to join us. You're very welcome. Glad to be here again. Well, thank you,
 Michael. A lot to get into and it's been a while since you and I have talked. A lot has continued
 to happen on the world stage. A lot of people have been asking for your return to the program
 so very glad you've been finally able to get time together here with you. A lot of
 questions but let's start with a general one I like to kick these off with. What's your current
 assessment of the global economy and financial markets? That's a fantastic question. Anytime it's
 asked at the end of a year which has been a real crazy year ahead of another year which looks like
 it's going to be a real crazy year, it's the perfect time to ask it. I had two titles that
 I was playing with for my 2024 outlook which you have to kind of start fleshing out this time of
 year. So originally I was going to go with the movie title from years ago, The Year of Living
 Dangerously, which was actually about events in Indonesia in the past but I thought summed up
 the totality of what we're looking at in 2024 and I still like that one but actually being more
 specific because markets like things to be really specific, I'm now playing around with instead
 bullets, ballots and beeps as in basis points because I think really that's what
 2024 is going to be all about. It is dangerous but it's this intersection of elections,
 war and the yield curve and they all join together. If anyone's an expert on only one of them,
 they're missing the whole picture. Alright, and did I catch it right? Bullets, ballots and beeps?
 Yeah, bullets, ballots and beeps. Yeah, or beeps as we say in English but yeah, English-English.
 Exactly, British-English. Okay, great. Well, okay, so hopefully most of the questions I have lined up
 here will kind of help us touch on each one of those and why don't we start with the beeps
 or the bips as us Americans or want to say. Central banks, I know that you've been writing
 a fair amount about this. My general question is sort of like what do you expect next from
 the Federal Reserve and its brethren and let me just give it a little bit of context to the
 question which is that, and you've written about this a lot recently, Wall Street at this point is
 positively salivating for rate cuts at some point in Q1 of next year. Honestly, you could say that
 that's sort of been the story for the past year plus of the Fed's hiking cycle where the market
 has been just expecting a Fed pivot and every time Palos had to say, "Nope, higher for longer. Nope,
 higher for longer," and the market has had to adjust. Now, it hasn't mattered. The market's
 powered to pretty big highs this year through all of that, but right now, that is absolutely
 the dominant narrative here, at least in the US and in Wall Street. Having read your recent
 commentary, I think you're a bit skeptical of that, but I guess, look, we've had tons of liquidity
 being pumped into the system, even though we're theoretically in a tightening cycle here and the
 Fed is supposed to be putting on the monetary breaks. I've got a chart I'll bring up here in
 just a second, but we've had sort of almost stealth liquidity coming from the reverse repo program,
 from the BTFP, from the deficit spending, the sort of wartime levels of deficit spending that
 we're having here in the US, and now with the markets having done as well as they have,
 financial conditions have been loosening, which kind of flies in the face of all
 the tightening efforts that the Fed has at least titually been trying to do here.
 So one might say that might make it harder for the Fed to achieve its 2% inflation objective,
 but anyways, there's just a lot of cross currents in the mix here,
 but a lot of optimism right now on Wall Street again that those rate cuts are coming. What do
 you think? Well, let's start with Wall Street. Just to reiterate for those who haven't been
 reading what I'm writing, Wall Street at the moment, yes, is extremely happy. It's giving
 itself this year's Christmas presents and next year's Christmas presents, very generous ones,
 in advance. But unfortunately, far too much of the street really just is involved in frivolity,
 what Marx would have called fictitious capital and what in more plain English we could just call
 bullshit. There's just an enormous amount of that about, of course, they're going to price for those
 Fed cuts because that basically keeps them alive, keeps their bonuses up, keeps them in a job.
 So of course, they're going to price for a scenario where not only do they keep their
 job next year, but the bonus packet is bulging. Are we going to see it? Well, look, from a Fed
 perspective, every central bank is different, but from a Fed perspective, we could see a scenario
 where you get a couple of cuts next year from the second half of the year, not earlier than that.
 Two, three, that's possible. But if you've got inflation heading down in that scenario, too,
 your real rate of interest actually hasn't declined that much. So your real rate of interest actually
 is still going to be pretty high, pretty tight, pretty painful for most people. And that's pretty
 much your best scenario because on one hand, if the Fed has got this wrong, which is kind of like
 Wall Street is expecting and cheering for, but at the same time not seeing all the consequences of
 that, we are going to have a very painful downturn, a very painful recession. Really the kind of gut
 punch that the US economy is in no position to handle when you've got a society this polarized
 and this many angry, unhappy people already. Nobody wants to contemplate that, certainly
 not Wall Street, but that is a risk, not a forecast, but a risk. And on the other hand,
 if you add to all the long list of things that you just came up with saying these are liquidity
 injections that we have to be aware of, there's another factor here, and it's one that we have
 discussed together in the past, but I think is incredibly pertinent, which is the Fed isn't even
 in control of this process anymore completely. They may be trying to run a pseudo Austrian-ish
 policy at home to try and get rid of some of this frivolity, fictitious capital and bullshit,
 and all power to them if they can do that. But from an international perspective, you do still
 have a geopolitical struggle between a Western world and a global South, between the G7, G20,
 and the BRICS, between those who would prefer to use commodities as the bottom tranche of the
 collateral pyramid in the Eurodollar system or as an alternative to the Eurodollar system,
 and those who want to keep using the US dollar as part of a global system.
 And the long and the short of that is this. If the Fed cuts too much too early,
 even if it thinks it sees the right indicators from a domestic perspective for that to happen,
 if it hasn't broken the back of the frivolity, the fictitious capital, and the bullshit in Wall
 Street, and it hasn't broken the back of its geopolitical rivals internationally, as soon as
 those rates go down, you will see every asset class go through the roof, which is what Wall
 Street wants, and every commodity price go through the roof, at which point inflation comes roaring
 back, and the Fed will have made exactly the Arthur Burns 1970s era that is so very adamant
 it isn't going to make. And that's an international argument, not just a domestic one.
 All right. So super interesting. Okay, so basically Fed pivots too early, and it falls
 into the trap that it seems to be so desperate not to fall into again, in other words, making the
 Arthur Burns mistake. So somebody questions about this. I guess first off is what do you think, and
 I'm asking you to just totally speculate here, but how aware of this danger do you think the current
 FOMC is? It depends on the actual member. I'm not as well placed as maybe some other guests
 you have who might know some of them personally because they're Americans and have mixed in those
 circles for a long time. I'm here in Asia, and I'm a Brit. So no insider connection. But certainly,
 if you look at the background of some of them and the reasons they were appointed and their
 particular viewpoint, both politically and geopolitically, I think some of them are pretty
 wise to it. And I think some of them are actually naive to it. Particularly, for example, those who
 are more dovish, and Goolsbee in particular, let me just bring him up openly. I think he's the kind
 of thinker who very much focuses from a more Keynesian/modern monetary theory perspective,
 which is, if we put enough liquidity into this, we can make it work. Well, that relates to a point
 that I've made repeatedly in the past couple of months in my daily note when I write it. It's
 actually Rabobank's daily note when I write the daily note, which is that Keynes in 1942
 gave a very short speech saying something very important, where he said, "Anything we can do,
 we can afford." And if you think of it, he's absolutely right. If you've got unemployment,
 if you've got spare capacity, if you've got idle factories, if you've got human capital just
 sitting there doing nothing, well, yeah, you can afford to do anything. The government can borrow
 and/or monetize to mop up that excess capacity to produce output, which will produce revenue,
 which can actually be stimulative and can make things work. Now, yeah, there are ifs and buts
 and maybes to that, but overall, he was right. What do you do in a US economy where you can't
 physically do anything anymore? What do you do if you're going to throw stimulus into an economy
 where you don't have the factory capacity, you don't have the infrastructure capacity,
 you don't have the labor capacity? It's only going to be inflationary. And due to the genius
 of maintaining a stimulatory policy alongside offshoring up until now, you've basically created
 that environment for yourself so that you will have that higher inflation kicking in
 if you try and stimulate in that way. The only way you can stimulate is going on the supply side,
 but the FOMC are not quite there yet to understand that.
 Right. I mean, even self admittedly, they don't really have a lot of opportunity
 or ability to influence the supply side. I mean, their leavers are really more demand leavers,
 correct? They are, excuse me.
 In terms of the economy, in terms of the money supply.
 Well, I mean, this takes us straight away to, it's good maybe to get to a real heavy
 point in the discussion early on so we can go to new areas.
 Go for it. Because I think we've
 touched on this in past conversations. And if we haven't, let me be really upfront about it.
 I've had a thesis for a while. And it transcends where a lot of the argument is now between people
 who think, okay, rates can be cut versus rates have to stay on hold, or maybe even edge a bit
 higher. And it transcends the argument between those who say, we need to tighten our belt because
 that is too high. And those who say no, no, we need to keep stimulating to try and keep things
 moving forward. My argument is whatever you say within that matrix, higher, lower, looser, tighter,
 you're wrong. Whatever point you pick now, you're wrong. There's nothing that will work for either
 the US or the broader Western economy from a starting base that we have now, which is a very
 weak supply side in terms of what can be physically produced. And the long list of geopolitical
 political challenges we have, which require a lot of output, which we just simply don't have,
 because we don't have the production. And we don't even have the inputs anymore. We're kind
 of offshored all the inputs, too. So what's the correct policy stance? You're going to have to
 have a rollback of policy to the way things used to be done before the 1980s, which very few viewers
 will remember. And you know, I was a kid in the 70s. But I had the vaviest of memories of what it
 was like in terms of what people were talking about around the dinner table. And you know,
 I can read my economic history, which is you're going to have to have tighter policy and looser
 policy, you're going to have to have higher rates and lower rates all at the same time. And you're
 going to have to combine that with elements of protectionism, and industrial policy and changes
 to every policy as part of a grand strategy to make sure you don't do stupid stuff. You only do
 relevant stuff, and the market is stupid. So the market will not do that for you with a high
 interest rate, or a low interest rate. And the government is also stupid. So it won't do it with
 very loose policy or very tight policy. You have to change everything in terms of how we understand
 what we do. And the Fed will have to be part of that. Okay, so I do remember this conversation.
 I get this look a lot, head in hands. Yeah, well, so a couple of things. So first off,
 I do remember this conversation with you. And it was basically that we're going to have to
 selectively target different parts of the economy with different policies. Right? Right. Yeah. And
 that's the way we're going to have to, you think we're going to have to play this. And I'm thinking
 of two other movie titles. One was No Way Out, which is, I hear your matrix, and I'm like, yeah,
 I get it. And then I think about, okay, so we need to basically have a very intelligent, surgical
 approach to figuring out the sort of patchwork quilt, where are we going to ease, where are we
 going to tighten? But when I look at the people who we're relying on for that, they have a horrible
 track record. So I think of the movie Idiocracy, where I'm just like, Michael, I just don't know
 with the team of leaders we have if we can really expect anything other than disaster from that.
 Well, if you're thinking that Janet Magic Mushroom Yellen is going to be the person who can do this,
 then you're absolutely right to be skeptical. I mean, power app was a vacuum and cometh the hour,
 cometh the man or the woman. And I do think eventually you will get that leadership.
 Let me just try and point to one or two things I'm seeing around me. And maybe in Rorschach fashion,
 I'm overstating it. But I do think that they are starting to be some of the dots. And if you
 project them forward, you can see how this may begin to happen. So first of all, there's a lot
 to dislike about biodynamics. But some of the direction is heading in the kind of general path
 that I'm talking about, which is saying, okay, this is an important sector. That isn't, but we
 want the market to operate in its environment. So here's a subsidy for x. Here's a tariff,
 so you can't get it from abroad. So we're already moving down that path. Okay.
 Sorry to interrupt, but like with an example of investing in
 manufacturing capacity inside America, would that be an example of?
 Yeah, exactly. For example, they're saying like, we want to build EV battery chains,
 now battery supply chains. I'm not saying if it's a good thing or bad, right? I'm not trying to take
 a political stance one way or the other. I'm saying that's exactly the kind of policy I said
 years ago would emerge. Because if we want this, we want it made in America, and we want to
 incentivize the private sector to do it for us rather than being government money. So we'll use
 a combination of subsidies and tariffs to make sure it's cheaper to do it here. So they're doing
 that. It is having a real world impact in that particular sector, a big one. The industry is
 being sucked up from Europe in particular, I'm moving to America, because of cheap energy costs
 as well. But partly because of that investment framework. So that kind of thing can work. And
 even with the very limited human capital we have in Congress, that's kind of already happening.
 And there's another one that I just saw this week. Del Toro, the US Navy secretary,
 has given a speech in which he said that we have to, or let's say we, the US, has to reverse its
 long run decline as a maritime power, a merchant marine power, which is something I was arguing
 two years ago in my report called In Deep Ship. And the history said that the US would reverse it.
 And to do that, you've got to build many more shipyards again, in order to build many,
 many more commercial ships to rebuild your merchant marine. Because the spillover from
 that means you've got the spare capacity to build military vessels, military ships,
 as and when you need. Because right now you can't keep pace with the combined total of the US
 geopolitical enemies, who are all about production. Whereas the US is more about financialization.
 So he's already talking about, openly, getting all the bureaucrats to talk to each other,
 which is one big problem. And on the other one, he's talking about using a Reagan era,
 I think it's called Title 46, I may be misremembering that, but it's a Reagan era
 policy tool still available to them, that if the secretary of transport signs off on it,
 and Homeland Security, and the head of the Navy, if they all sign and tick,
 you can build a ship in the US with a 50% discount, with the government basically
 paying the rest for you. So in other words, you subsidize shipbuilding back in the US again.
 Now at the same time, then you need to have shipyards, because where are your shipyards?
 Well, he's talking about getting Australia, Japan, South Korea, all the big shipbuilding
 or steelmaking nations to come and reopen shipyards in the US, which the government
 will make profitable, because you're going to have a guaranteed flow of vessels being
 built over the next 10, 15, 20 years or whatever, to make sure it's worth making that investment.
 So again, you're changing the framework that the market operates within, using subsidies
 and tariffs, and you're doing that to try and retake commercial control of the high seas,
 which is a great idea for the US, by the way, and to give yourself the wiggle room that if you need
 to then shift to military production, you can. It's a tick, tick, tick exercise everywhere you look.
 Yeah. But it's free money. It's a 50% discount for the right sector. It's kind of like BTFP,
 which is what you were referring to, but for the real economy rather than the financial economy.
 Okay. So this is super interesting. And I'm sure there are probably some folks that are watching
 who are hanging on by their fingernails trying to follow everything here. But
 let me ask you this, Michael. So we just got a front row seat in terms of what it looks like
 when your supply chains are overextended and you're too dependent upon other parts of the
 world for essential goods and services inside your own nation. I mean, everybody kind of got that
 during COVID. I think it probably makes sense to a lot of people watching that, yeah, you know what,
 we probably to be a more resilient nation, we probably want to reshore, French or take a more
 intelligent look at our supply chains. And I'm sure there's a huge appetite from a lot of viewers
 here to say, look, let's not just throw all the stimulus into financialization. Let's put it in
 real things that make real things, create real jobs, benefit us as world citizens.
 So to a certain extent, I think people can kind of get behind some of the spirit of what you're
 talking about here. If we do this, let's assume for a second, we even do it intelligently.
 All right. What's the lived experience going to be like for the next, well, for as long as it
 takes to do this? And what do you, this isn't like a, it's not like something that's going to
 be over in just a couple of years, right? We're talking about a grand scope of at least a couple
 of decades of this sort of rebuilding and surgical dialing up and dialing down of parts of the
 economy. You're nodding as I'm saying this, but please correct me if I'm wrong. What would that
 look like? I mean, will this to a certain extent be inflationary because we're spending lots of
 money and employing a lot of people and driving wages up and, you know, obviously if we're going
 to be subsidizing foreign countries to come build here, I mean, it sounds like a lot of spending.
 And maybe that is the right thing to do. Or will there be savings that will offset this when you
 talk about sort of feeding parts of the economy and starving other parts? Like what would it feel
 like to live through this as a citizen? Well, first of all, we'll find out. But secondly,
 if you look at history as a lesson, effectively, you're reversing a lot of the effects that you've
 seen over the past 40 years. So instead of there being an agglomeration of power in the East Coast
 and the West Coast, it will go back towards more traditional manufacturing sectors and towards the
 South, obviously, like Texas and Florida are already doing well, as we know within the US.
 Okay, I can see a lot of people except the bankers kind of cheering that, so okay.
 No, exactly. And there's another one. So who's done well out of 40 years of globalization and
 financialization? The bankers, Wall Street. This would literally be, and again, I'm not in any way
 making this a Democrat or Republican issue, because the Republicans, trust me, have their
 own version of this as cooking that we can discuss in a moment. They have a different way of doing
 the same thing. This is good for Main Street. It's very bad for Wall Street. Is it inflationary?
 Of course it's inflationary. There's an enormous amount of capital spending going on
 right away across the economy, where you have structural shortages, and you will have structural
 shortages for year after year after year, until you eventually, with a J-curve effect,
 manage to start generating more output. So it's inflationary long before it's deflationary or
 low-flationary in those sectors. But it's designed to be low-flationary in those sectors, because
 you're producing output at scale, which is how the U.S. always used to bring down the cost of goods
 versus Europe. We'll just make it bigger. We'll go bigger and bigger and bigger, produce more and
 more of it. The unit costs come down. And actually, we make more of it. We flood the world with it,
 China-style. That's what the U.S. used to do. Now it's all about moving numbers around on a screen
 and Gordon Gekko-style spibs, basically saying this is the route to wealth. So obviously,
 those guys are going to hate it. They'll lobby against it every step of the way.
 They are going to have to be part of the process, because the government doesn't want to run
 everything in a kind of socialist manner and say that we are going to dictate where everything
 goes. They just create the framework and let the water flow. And some of the guys who are surfing
 on that will still be Wall Street types, and they'll still make money. But they're not going
 to make the wild, crazy money that they have done. It will be much more cuff and collars in terms of
 where it goes and how much you can make out of it. And if you're doing stupid stuff, absolutely
 irrelevant, stupid, short-sighted, idiotic stuff, which is of no value to the U.S., as a U.S. inc,
 great power in the world attempting to try and maintain its status, I think you're going to have
 a hell of a time of it. And I mean that in a negative sense. I think it's going to be an awful
 10, 15, 20, 25 years. And my heart bleeds for you, quite frankly.
 Okay. Well, and sorry, you just, I think we're speculating here, but you pulled the number,
 I think, of like 15 years out of the hat there. I mean, is that sort of the timeframe you think
 this engineer, and of course, it's not going to start one year and just stop the next, but
 it's going to require that type of time commitment, it sounds like.
 Absolutely. I mean, we are looking at a multi-decade period of time to disentangle
 supply chains from China, to near shore them, French shore them, and to a large degree onshore
 them, depending on where the priority lies, to rebuild the logistical networks that go along
 with that, to reskill the relevant parts of the workforce again, or to fully automate where you
 can't get the labor, all of which is, as I said, capital intensive, is going to take 20 years.
 During that period, can you have pockets of deflation? Sure. Can you have unexpected downturns?
 Absolutely. I mean, I'm one of these guys who always says to you, life isn't a straight line.
 I can't stand these forecasts that don't show that actually life's more like this, right? So
 of course you're going to have them, but anyone who thinks, even in 2024, that
 rates are just going to be slashed again, that's it. We're going all the way back to 2008. That's
 the only way out of this. I just don't see it. And if we do go that route, and it's a separate
 conversation, I'm really scared by what that actually means. And when you talked about your
 matrix there, and I came up with no way out, do you see this path we're talking about as
 pretty much the inevitable one to get to a better tomorrow? In other words, even if we do
 something different for a while, maybe the thing that scares you, it's not going to work,
 and we're eventually going to have to find our way back to this type of path. Is that how you
 look at this? 100%. I do very little except think about this. This future, what alternatives there
 are if you try X or Y or Z, or which combination might possibly work, presuming that the players
 on the other side of the field do A, B, or C. I gain this out all the time. I have done for years.
 And the simple fact is, people who are experts in one area, be it the Fed, be it an equity
 specialist, or whatever, yadda, yadda, yadda, until you join it all together, you will be wrong,
 because you'll keep thinking that some narrow aspect of what we've already tried, as I said,
 looser fiscal policy, wrong. Tighter fiscal policy, wrong. Higher rates, wrong. Lower rates,
 very wrong. None of them will work. Free trade absolutely will not work, globally. Protectionism,
 universally, won't work. It's going to have to be some protectionism, some free trade,
 some higher rates, some lower rates, some looser policy, some tighter policy,
 in order to turn the ship around. And there's nothing else that will work for the US. And
 that doesn't mean, to go back to your earlier point, that we will do it first. Because what
 did Churchill say about the Americans? I'm thinking of the exact same quote.
 Yeah, yeah. You always do the right thing after you've tried everything else.
 Exactly. But you have tried everything else. And just to underline a point I was making a second
 ago, people might think, OK, so I'm backing Bidenomics by what I've said. That's not what
 I'm trying to say. I'm trying to say that there are elements of it, which I think--
 I don't get that sense, by the way. I don't get-- yeah, yeah.
 OK. So I'm not political like that. But the Republican side, if you look at what Trump's
 suggesting-- because people are not paying attention to his policy platform. Excuse me
 one second. Sorry, frog in the throat. If you look at what Trump's suggesting,
 he's talking about a quasi-Hamiltonian policy. And this is something that most Americans have
 completely forgotten about. I mean, Hamilton was responsible for the intellectual framework,
 which made the US a giant it is today, rather than being a farm growing food for the British.
 You know, you didn't have any industry. But he said, we have to have industry. Otherwise,
 we're always just going to be bullied by everyone else. We'll be safe and a vast land. But everyone
 will tell us what to do. So what did he do? Well, he argued for very high tariffs to make sure that
 everything, everything that you needed would be made in America, rather than being imported from
 the industrial powers. High land prices as well, which would, of course, be popular with some
 of them on Wall Street. And then you tax land. And you tax-- well, you take the tax revenue from
 tariffs. And you keep local production costs low. So Trump's talking about a universal tariff on
 everything coming in. It's not very geopolitically smart. But I understand where it's coming from.
 And then slashing the cost of production in America. And if you look at the American compass,
 like the, I think they're beyond Trumpism, the national conservative movement within the
 Republican Party, who are, you know, currently on the fringe, shall we say, but moving more and more
 towards the center where every year, when the traditional Republican policy fails again and
 again, which it always will do now in this environment, they're arguing for something
 similar. They're saying like, we need a new social compact with labor, we need a national
 investment bank to build infrastructure, we need selective protectionism. You know, we need to
 reregulate industry to make sure that it's got a national focus, which is what Hamilton would have
 backed, as did Adam Smith, as did David Ricardo, by the way. You know, we need to make sure the
 money stays at home and circulates locally. And we need to break up monopolies. And I'm not sure
 if Trump will do that. I think he's big on mergers. But you know, that's another way you can go. But
 then you can say, right, here's a giant American company. Now you work for Team America. So we've
 let you get big. Now you do buy one phone call, what we want you to do. That's the Chinese method.
 So there are lots of different ways to get to the same general pattern, which is it isn't going to
 be what it used to be. What's so interesting to me in this, Michael, is so much of the outcome
 at the end when the dust settles, if I'm understanding you correct, I mean, it sounds
 pretty aspirational. Like, it sounds like a lot of things, I think most people would say,
 yeah, that sounds pretty good. Like, I remember in one of our first interviews, you talked about
 the multi decade suppression, or let me put it this way, the field had just been so increasingly
 tilted towards capital versus labor, that you said, if labor looks like it's going to start
 getting any sort of advantage, that's when the central banks are really going to kick into action,
 because the whole power structure right now is set up to protect capital.
 But what you're describing sounds like a way to maybe even the playing field a little bit,
 it sounds like it's not going to be as easy to Hoover up all the advantage in the world
 on the capital side. And labor may get a little bit of a fairer shake. And local production costs
 are low. That hopefully keeps cost of living controllable for people from a national standpoint,
 we'll be a lot more resilient, both economically and in our defense and all sorts of other things,
 it sounds like. We'll be reinvesting in real things. So much of the economic attention will
 be on things that actually create value and do real things as opposed to just move paper
 or ones and zeros around from one rich person's pocket into another. I'm maybe painting with a
 little bit of too much of a Pollyanna-ish brush here. And I know some people will be
 rightly concerned that it sounds like the state will be playing a somewhat heavy handed role here
 at times. And to a certain extent, picking winners and losers, which a lot of people,
 myself included, are not completely comfortable with. But in total, what you're describing,
 it doesn't sound all that bad. Even our current system of capitalism, I've railed with many other
 speakers on this program, Michael, that it's really a captured form of capitalism. It's a
 corporatism. It's a cronyism. There are a number of, if not monopolies, kind of corporate cartels
 right now that I don't think too many people would shed a tear if they got broken up a bit.
 And allowed for more competition. And you didn't have the ability of a very small cadre of people
 to own the vast majority of the nation's wealth. So when you think about this, what, if anything,
 kind of concerns you about the solution? Well, first of all, thank you for that lovely
 eloquent, better than I did summary of what I'm trying to put forward. That was very nicely put.
 The downside is this. The reason why I pivoted from the earlier view that I expressed to you
 the first time we spoke, which is that central banks would do everything they can to try and
 push down that wage growth is because at that point, and I think I've used this analogy before,
 we were in a Marxian world, labor versus capital. Central banks clearly represented the power of
 capital. Well, we've moved from a Marxian world to a Leninist world of political violence
 and revolution. And in that environment, you can see that Western society is fracturing,
 and it's fracturing pretty badly and pretty fast. I mean, just look at the congressional testimony,
 you know, of the elite university presidents and the absolute moral scandal that you saw there
 recently, which has finally got the public focusing something that many of us have been
 aware of for a very long time, and which is far more widespread than just those elite universities,
 by the way. It's a huge issue. And right the way across the West. So you've got that in terms of,
 you know, societal polarization and dispersion, if you will, which ultimately will come for Wall
 Street. You know, if you're going to have a society where everyone is an oppressor or oppressed,
 and you can use violence as the oppressed, there isn't a single person working on Wall Street
 today who isn't going to find themselves in the crosshairs of that at some point. And so, you
 know, forget about a comfortable retirement. That changes the game for everyone. That changes the
 game for central banks, too. They're suddenly realizing, and I'm next on this list are a couple
 of names down. So this cannot continue. And then geopolitically, and in parallel to that,
 and with one feeding the other very deliberately, you know, you have obviously the tensions with
 Russia, the tensions with China, the tensions with Iran, the tensions with North Korea,
 you have, you know, a series of wars taking place around the world, which I think will grow. That
 list of wars will grow. And I think those wars themselves will escalate, not to World War Three,
 to be blunt, but enough that we're no longer living in a peaceful environment, but we recognize
 we're living in an environment of war. So if you have those together, that's why I said that we
 would shift from a Marxist view to a Leninist view. That's why I went from lower for longer,
 which I was for 20 years, to higher for longer now, or war for longer, which is, generally
 speaking, higher for longer. And it's certainly higher for longer for those who are not doing
 well in the war. If you're doing well in the war, you can afford lower for longer. If you're not,
 you need to be higher for longer. But obviously, that shows you that this transition, let's call
 it a transition, is going to be very hard fought. There are going to be very, very powerful actors
 domestically and internationally, who are going to use every tool at their disposal to stop it
 happening. And some of them are going to be peaceful, and some of them are going to be
 violent. And the battle to achieve this outcome will take year after year after year, election
 after election, and it's going to be really volatile. All right, and let me just push on this,
 because this goes back to my earlier question, which is, I totally agree, even in the best of
 times, the people who benefit from the power structure resist change with every fiber
 of their being, with every strategy at their disposal. A lot of what you're talking about
 is disruption. And it probably won't be popular disruption in a lot of places at the beginning.
 As certain parts of the economy are told, all right, you're going to get starved, because we're
 going to feed these guys over here. There's going to be a lot of sense of injustice. People aren't
 going to totally understand the big picture in every case. It's going to need really strong,
 capable, and consistent leadership to drive this through. I'm concerned that we don't have it right
 now. I'm not even necessarily sure you're saying it's going to -- maybe the seeds of it are being
 sown right now, but maybe we don't have a leader who's going to drive it through.
 As somewhat of a student of human nature, I feel that, to your point about Churchill's quote,
 people resist and fight change up until the point when they realize the pain of continuing
 the status quo is higher than the pain of change. My point is, we're probably going to have to have
 a lot of pain before the nation rallies around this type of surgery that you're talking about.
 That might be pain caused by us making the wrong decisions for a while and then blowing up in our
 face or having a weak or poor leader try to kick this thing off or whatnot. Just like the person
 doesn't change their lifestyle until they've had that first heart attack. How much pain do
 you think it's really going to require before the right leader is revealed and the people are
 willing to line up behind that leader? That's a very good question. It's very difficult to
 say precisely because it depends on the country and the culture and where the individual pain
 thresholds lie. You can be optimistic and say we're already there because the experiences of
 the past three or four years have just been awful. I mean, COVID, my God, we've tried to blank out
 what a terrible bloody experience that was for two years. Then 2022 with the energy crisis,
 the food price crisis, et cetera, et cetera, absolute shocker. 2023, we've had sky high
 interest rates, sky high inflation and another war starting. We're not even halfway through
 the decade yet and it's every bit as bad as I feared the 20s would be. I think I remember
 telling you early on, I was laughing at people who said this will be the roaring 20s. Talking about
 the Great Gatsby, I'm like, have you read the history of the roaring 20s? Talking about a civil
 war in Ukraine, Hitler tried his first push. There was a civil war in China. Just unbelievable
 bloodshed and misery and chaos right the way up until the last little bit just before the stock
 market bubble blew up. I said, don't make a comparison with that decade. It was awful.
 Well, here we are. But the optimist view might be that we've had enough already and you are
 starting to see, I think, a really sea change in politics in Western democracies. Now, you may
 approve or disapprove of the individual election results in country after country, but I think
 people have had enough. I think you're starting to see people say, I can't think of things in a
 three-dimensional multidisciplinary cross-asset, cross-geography sense the way that, you know,
 schmucks like me try and do. I underline try. But things are not working and I want things to be
 done differently. You can be mis-sold the same old policies again by the same old people for a while.
 But the optimist will say, we're already there. We're just waiting for someone to be able to
 coherently put that policy framework together. Now, the pessimist will say, no.
 Sorry to interrupt, but before you get to the pessimist, just to make sure I understand your
 optimist point there, that political movement you're talking about that we're beginning to see,
 it's more of sort of like, look, I don't care so much about the grand globalization,
 world economic forum, we're all holding hand kumbaya in the world, our country is not being run
 well, let's clean up things up here at home first. Some might call that a little bit more of a
 nationalistic platform, but is that the movement you're talking about? Like, hey, let's clean up
 our own mess for ourselves first? Yeah, completely, and by the way, this was completely predictable
 because if going back four or five years you looked at the policy framework we had and you
 said it doesn't work, which I did and I did, I said that ultimately left versus right would no
 longer be the argument because left doesn't work, right doesn't work, higher taxes don't work, lower
 taxes don't work, none of them will solve what's going on domestically and internationally in terms
 of rebalancing power domestically and internationally. So I said that the ultimate
 emergence would be between people who say we want to think nationally and then maybe think nationally
 in conjunction with other countries who are thinking nationally, so nationalists of the world
 unite, if you will, which is kind of an ironic way of looking at it, and people who think no,
 we have to go to the highest level, sit in the cockpit and have everything controlled from Davos
 and that will be your tension. That's exactly our tension, that's exactly what's emerged.
 Now there are strong points and weak points in both camps, but I think if you look at the
 recent trend in election results across western democracies it's very clearly moving in a more
 nationalist direction. Can that be mismanaged? God yeah, I'm a Brit, look at Brexit. If you want to
 talk about mismanagement of a nationalist policy there's, you know, there's exhibit A. Does that
 mean it's the wrong impulse? Not necessarily, it just means it needs to be done right rather than
 by charlatans. It's got to be done carefully and logically with the strategic vision rather than
 flag-waving and just saying, you know, let's shift from metric to imperial measures as if that's going
 to somehow rebuild the British Empire, right? So I see that happening and that's the optimist case
 that we're already getting the wind in our sails. The pessimist case is that, you know, we'll just
 be mis-sold the same old crap again for another four years and the problem is if that does happen
 I am genuinely genuinely frightened, I want to be abundantly clear about that, frightened by what it
 would mean to try another four or five years of the same old crap, particularly if that comes
 alongside slashing interest rates back down to zero again and/or tax cuts and/or more free trade deals
 and/or, you know, more deregulation etc etc. All the things we've tried and failed.
 We try them again now when you've got inequality where it is,
 where you've got political polarization where it is, where you have institutional failure like
 Harvard at the level it is now. I don't know if we can recover from that objectively. So that's the
 pessimistic point of view that if we kick the can down the road another four or five years I don't
 know if we emerge okay at the end. Alright, I don't want to be the wet blanket in the room but
 calling shots from my seat here in the US, I'm feeling much more like the pessimistic view is
 probably going to prevail. I don't see us getting our act together and lining up behind these
 policies. It's just not happening at least right now at the national consciousness of the average
 guy here. So unless our politicians are somehow locking arms on this behind closed doors away from
 the C-SPAN cameras because right now it looks like we're as divided and partisan as we've ever been
 in the halls of Capitol Hill so I don't know. I don't want to make you lose additional sleep
 tonight, Michael, but I would take the under on the optimist versus the pessimist bet there.
 Hey, a couple quick things. So first off, what do you call this model?
 Do you have a term for it yet? Yeah, I do. You could call it,
 the original name I had for it was post Keynesian. It's a bit technical but viewers if you're a
 Keynesian you think the government can just spend, right? Just borrow. Post Keynesians
 make that argument anything we can do we can afford which is if you've got the industrial
 spare capacity you can do MMT. You can monetize to get the parts of the economy working you need
 to get working if they're just sitting there idle. In fact, you should do that. That's a post
 Keynesian argument. This is a post-post Keynesian argument because you can't do it if you don't have
 any spare capacity. If you've taken a developed market like the US, DM, developed market and you
 effectively made it into an emerging market, EM, by polarizing the population in terms of income
 and wealth, dismantling the education system so most people are functional idiots rather
 than actually capable of having rational conversation, ruining your political process
 one way or another and then removing your industrial capacity so you can't make anything
 anymore. You have to buy it from everybody else. You look just like an emerging market and you will
 have the volatility of an emerging market at which point the only policies you can use
 are the development policies that emerging markets use which is okay let's go back to the early
 American experience, high tariffs, protecting from industries, more prickly, more porcupine-like,
 more defensive, more realpolitik. Let's presume the world is out to get us rather than the world
 is out to supply us with cheap stuff just because we're America. It's post-post Keynesian. That's
 one word for it. Another word would just be realpolitik. This really is just the way the
 world always used to be until after World War II. It's all against all, trying to keep
 domestic stability and trying to keep your head above water internationally. Okay, I was going
 to say we're going to have to work on the branding if it's post-post Keynesian but realpolitik maybe
 gets a little bit closer to that but I'll put the branding team on it, Michael. Please do.
 I'm not running for office but it would be great if you can come up with something.
 I was thinking of something like neo-Hamiltonian just because of the popularity of Hamilton.
 You might sell that to Americans, right? There you go. Neo-Hamiltonian. I mean it is that too
 in a nutshell actually. Okay, well look, you talked about the whole geopolitical element
 here to this and we have in the past talked about -- I started this video with mentioning
 Felix Zulauf saying we're kind of shifting from this unipolar world order to a multi-polar world
 disorder. In the past when you and I have talked, we've spent some time talking about the division
 between Team West and the BRICS and of course a lot of speculation going on right now about how
 those are going to be sort of the two big powers coalitions that are going to be determining the
 future. Very well still may be the case but I do remember you saying because you have spent time
 in both countries, notably Russia and China, you said, "Hey look guys, folks that are expecting
 Russia and China to kind of win this game and particularly win this game by collaborating
 really closely together," you were very skeptical of that. You thought that those countries had
 a lot more internal shortcomings, maybe even decay, whatever, I don't want to put words in your mouth,
 but also the fact that a lot of this sort of Team BRICS coalition are countries that have had,
 to put it as kindly as I can, really rocky relationships over the past centuries and
 millennia. So to expect them to be the sort of united confederation to take on Team West,
 they're certainly trying to do it, they will certainly likely have a certain degree of success
 for it, but if I remember correctly you were saying don't give them too much credit. Is that
 still your point of view? Broadly speaking, yes, but let me use an analogy of like a card game.
 The other side really have a not particularly good hand in most respects, let's say they've got a
 pair of sixes and a pair of eights or something like that, not two pair, one's got a pair of
 sixes, one's got a pair of eights, they're not amazing by any means, they can't combine it into
 one hand to have two pair which would be nice, it doesn't work like that. And the West had/has
 a far better hand, a far better hand collectively as the West.
 What has disappointed me over the past year in particular
 is that you're seeing the West, for example, sit there with three aces and say well I'm just going
 to burn one and I'm going to, you know, and I'm just going to throw the other one out the window
 just because and it's like well yeah if you're going to do that then suddenly things start
 looking really pretty rocky, you know, there are any number of specific details I can drill down
 into but I won't bore you or, you know, or the viewers right now with it, where the West has
 had a winning, you know, a winning hand, a running royal flush and it's like yeah I fold, it's like
 well what the hell are you doing, what the hell are you doing? So they're not winning yet the
 other side, they still have serious issues. I mean just for example just today on social media I saw
 a reiteration of a point that when I was covering the Chinese economy I was making again and again
 and people didn't believe me, their cumulative fiscal deficit including the local government
 which is a big spender is 17% of GDP.
 17. You want to talk about a wartime fiscal deficit? Yeah. A wartime fiscal deficit,
 17% of GDP. There is no way back from that, there's no way out of that, they are in a world of hurt,
 okay? But if we are going to keep folding, which we do geopolitically, economically,
 because we're afraid of the friction which is going to happen and the tension which is going
 to happen and the volatility which is going to happen alongside this necessary transition to
 narrow our own internal gaps, change the balance of winners and losers and strengthen our position
 geopolitically, these are the others, if we're going to keep folding and saying well I'd rather
 I don't want the tension, I don't want the hassle, I don't want the volatility, then we keep folding,
 then we will lose. So it does worry me. So can you give me an example there? Let's say,
 Michael, I make you the advisor to Team West here. Give me an example of something that you would
 say, all right guys, look, don't do that, that's folding, do this instead, this is a power move
 that's going to serve you guys. Okay, well let's take a European example because I work for a
 European bank. So when the Europeans tried to impose sanctions on Russia very, very
 half-heartedly, in no time at all you got German exports to Kyrgyzstan, little tiny Kyrgyzstan
 rising 5500%. Who do you think that stops going to? I imagine similarly all of a
 sudden their purchases of Indian oil go through the roof and where are the Indians getting that
 oil from? Well on that front I've had it on, I didn't hear it directly but I heard it from
 someone who heard it from someone directly. So Chinese whispers to a degree but it came from
 a credible source that actually the US told India keep buying, we want you to buy Russian
 oil and we wanted to get back into the market. So they were well aware of the fact it was a shell
 game which you can believe that or not but it's just an interesting fact. Well if it's true it
 didn't make me feel any better, let me put it that way. No, but I mean from Europe's perspective
 where it was much more existential for them, the Greek tanker fleet immediately started to
 help shift Russian products by kind of turning off their transponders or changing their
 their flagging whatever technique they used. So the Greek shipping oligarchs were making
 absolute fortune just moving Russian stuff when Europe at the highest level was saying we don't
 want it to move. So the west doesn't work very well and I have to say that speaks to an interesting
 paper that I referred to in a daily note recently. I didn't need to read it because I could see it
 happening around me but it's interesting when people do academic study to back up something
 that you're already seeing. They published a paper I think it was at MIT called War Without Gunsmoke
 and these researchers basically said that when you look at a rising power, e.g. China today, e.g. Germany
 early 20th century and declining power, US today, UK 100 something years ago, when you look at the
 economic power structure within the two, because the declining power is much more internationalized
 and much more globalized, much more of the profit structure comes from offshore, vis-a-vis domestic,
 whereas in the rising power it's still much more tied to the mothership if you will.
 So as a result if Beijing today or Berlin back then says okay we're going to decouple
 or we're going to do xyz, everyone says yep we'll follow your lead. Whereas today if the US says
 right okay we're going to decouple from China you'll immediately have 100 US CEOs
 phoning you out and saying don't be stupid, my shareholders say xyz. It doesn't make any
 difference whether it's good or bad for America. It doesn't make any difference whether that
 means that firm will exist in 10, 15, 20 years or whether the American standard of living will go up
 of a cliff, they couldn't care less. It's about the three month reporting to shareholders,
 that's all that matters as a holy mantra. And 100 years ago the same was true in the UK.
 Apparently I didn't know this even though I know my economic history well,
 early in the 20th century the Brits were all for a preemptive war against Germany to nip it in the
 bud, they're like we can see what they're doing. If we have a quick war with them now we can take
 out their industrial capacity and we can maintain our hegemony you know globally and not have a bigger
 war in Europe. But the city of London, our version of Wall Street, stepped in and said you can't do
 that, they won't pay us back our bonds. I said well I can't have that, in that case right let's
 not do anything. What do we end up with World War I? So yeah the problem is the West can have the
 strongest hand but the incentives you have within a much more dispersed power structure can operate
 against the overall good of the system as a whole, whereas the other side doesn't have that to the
 same degree. So that's a depressing fact. It is and it just I mean again this would probably require
 you know some more centralization of control where they're just saying look you know these
 loose rules are not going to be permitted anymore and you know there's going to be real consequences.
 Again one of those instances where that's going to really rub a lot of people the wrong way but
 it might be the right thing to do for a period of time. I'm going to leave that to smarter people
 than I to determine. All right well look Michael, super fascinating. I could literally keep talking
 about this honestly for like the next three hours because this is if I just look at the questions
 I've written here while you've been talking I've gotten like two of them but let me if I can
 try to loop this back to the viewers here. So our viewers are regular investors. They're
 trying to crawl inside the minds of very smart people like you who have a very broad view of
 what's happening or likely to happen and you know basically they've got two questions in their mind.
 One is hey if change is coming how do I not become collateral damage to it and you've just talked
 about a lot of disruptive change and then also if change is coming and I can avoid becoming
 collateral damage is there a way for me to you know take gains through this or benefit prosper
 through it? We didn't really get so much in your market outlook. We're not going to have that much
 time here because I thought the the core of what we talked about was just a much more important
 concept to get get fleshed out for folks but as you look forward to this type of path you think
 we're going to have to take whether willingly or kicking and screaming will there be any sort of
 investment themes in it? In other words like it sounds like there's going to be a lot of building
 so will commodities do well? I mean are there certain currency moves you think
 you know are predictable or again are there any sort of just sort of grand themes from an
 investment standpoint that have popped into your mind as you've thought about this so closely?
 Yeah, no, absolutely. Let's bring it down to nuts and bolts. It depends how it plays out so let's go
 down two different paths at some point but generally speaking the first assumption is
 that at least while Powell is head of the Fed that we are more in a higher for longer environment
 than not that where you may get a moderate easing of rates at best we're not going to get the kind
 of slashing of rates and all assets go up fun fest the Wall Street is currently pricing for so current
 pricing is wrong. Now does that mean that stocks go down? I don't pick stocks and I make that
 abundantly clear. All I'll say is there's an election in 2024 and I'll eat my hat if the Fed
 lets the stock market collapse ahead of 2024. That you know there's always a way to gain the system
 through you know a judicious speech or whatever to encourage irrational exuberance ahead of an
 election so it wouldn't surprise me if stocks don't do well regardless of what the fundamentals say
 they should or shouldn't be doing but from a rates perspective the best case scenario is that they
 come down moderately if they do collapse as I said that's alongside a really scary downturn where all
 the kind of nasty political points and geopolitical points I've been referring to will be on our plate
 within months like you know really really big decisions on how do we do things what do we do
 how do we change the system that will be front and center straight away but I don't expect that
 to happen but if we are in a higher longer for environment and you know stocks can bump along
 quite nicely for a while that doesn't mean they keep doing it because after 2024 again all the
 volatility around the upcoming election then again you've got this direction of where are we going and
 I think geopolitical tensions political tensions will escalate significantly and we will start to
 see further structural change and I do think it is two steps forward one step back and with
 wildcards like AI for example no one quite knows what that means or where it will go
 but generally speaking in favor of you know construction infrastructure physical production
 where it can be done it is in favor of countries who are closer to the US geographically by Mexico
 or politically closer to the US like India Vietnam vis-a-vis China so opportunities there in terms of
 fx if we are not going to see rates slashed I still back the dollar you know it's taken a
 big knock recently because everyone thinks they are going to slash rates it will go back up again
 and test a new high as yields could too if everyone realizes that they're not going to do that
 big bear on the mfx in general on that basis and I remain you know very bearish on the outlook for
 anything and everything associated with China and and just expand on that for just a sec why are you
 so pessimistic on China well I've been a bear on China for ages just because I know by the way
 that's been completely held up by the performance of the asset markets I'm quite pleased with that
 call even if I don't make that recommendation per se to anyone listening their structural
 problems are even larger than the US and they have they're grappling with all the same problems
 that the US has got except they have a collapsing demography too and at the same time they can
 physically produce a hell of a lot of stuff that the US can't so they have no problem building a
 ship a week you know they can build incredible amount of planes and tanks munitions whatever
 they need they build too much that's their problem and you know there are all kinds of questions you
 can start asking about what do you do when you've got too much of stuff but it's more fun to be in
 a position of not being producing not producing enough and having that j curve to pivot towards
 starting to produce enough again these would be producing far too much and gradually losing
 clients who start saying well I don't need to buy from you things I'm going to make my own
 yep so of that seesaw I'd rather be on the side going up than the side going down
 all right super unfair question to ask at the end here but I'm just going to ask it anyways
 and we could talk about this for a whole hour or several hours but just to the point you raised
 there for a country like China that still has a massive population can make a ship a week
 and perhaps maybe beginning to realize it has diminishing prospects is there a risk of China
 becoming a little more aggressive on the world stage than it's been
 well first of all China is already aggressive on the world stage if you look at it but more
 aggressive it historically has not invaded other countries well we did Vietnam in the late 70s but
 the answer is first of all you have to wait and see what some of these elections coming up bring
 for example we've got one on the 13th of January in Taiwan let's see what the time on these election
 brings first of all that could really be a wild card but not enough people are talking about
 particularly if the pro-independence party wins again and has you know difficult rhetoric
 alongside that you know really rubbing China's nose in it that could be a real problem but I
 think the best thing to do is just to defer to you know military experts and there you have a
 broad range of opinion some of them say absolutely nothing to worry about no and others say absolutely
 you shouldn't be sleeping at night and so I will leave the you know the viewers to decide themselves
 which one they should be listening to but it's going to be one or the other
 and where's your risk reward in terms of how you're positioned if it's
 the opposite one to the one you've chosen
 yeah got it all right well look Michael thank you so much I want to I want to get to my very
 last question for you which is one I've just started asking people on this channel it is a
 what sort of non-financial investment would you encourage people to consider investing in right
 now in their lives I've gotten some really great answers before I ask you that just a couple other
 quick housekeeping things first off is most important for folks that have really enjoyed
 this conversation Michael and would like to follow you and your work where should they go
 uh have a look on LinkedIn you'll find me there and you know the highlights of my my work
 can be found there and I'm very happy to continue a discussion okay well you're very kind to to
 offer up your LinkedIn to folks that may want to reach out to you because I'm sure your framework
 has gotten a lot of people's attention here all right so Michael let's get to the last question
 here um beyond all of the uh you know oh my gosh should I be buying stocks bonds commodities what's
 going to happen with interest rates um just in terms of the you know investments that somebody
 should be considering uh to just increase the rods of living a rich life um what would you what would
 you recommend folks consider I'm going to give you a very strange answer I think but it's one from my
 own personal experience I wish I had taken the advice of when I was a kid get your feet checked
 and I say that I say that because um a very very high percentage of people
 uh actually require orthotics in their shoes to to stabilize their gait and their walk
 and if you do it when you're young in particular if you've got kids if you get them checked when
 they're young you can find that with relatively cheap preventative action as in physically getting
 the foot scanned the orthotic made put in the shoe and then making sure the child wears them
 and I was a child who was given them and threw them away because I wasn't interested in that
 namely silly games and no one followed up you can prevent extremely expensive long-run problems with
 your back with your neck with your ankles with your hips you can save yourself tens of thousands
 of dollars if not more over a lifetime in cumulative medical expenses which could have
 been going into your pension pot and growing at whatever a compound interest rate you know you're
 lucky enough to get that instead you have to have the running cost just to maintain a barely a barely
 functional physical frame just because you didn't start with literally a you know basics ground-up
 approach and my my economic philosophy is based on political economy and real policy which is ground
 up you know how do we start from here and go up do it with your feet too go and go ahead and check
 and even in you know at our age in your 40s and your 50s you'd still be surprised how much healthy
 you can be if you're walking right that that's what I love about this question is I'm just
 getting answers that I just never could have thought of and they're excellent and I'm a huge
 fan of investments like that that you know with a little you know a small amount a small amount
 of care and effort early on you can either save yourself you know tremendous costs amortize it
 over the rest of your life which is awesome but also increase your quality of life right you sort
 of talked about the cost savings of all the surgeries or corrective you know procedures and
 stuff like that but just think about the enhanced quality of life of somebody who doesn't have to
 deal with all those issues right so I got somebody I didn't get braces until I was 40 and and once I
 did and have benefited from that I've realized how much anguish I'll have saved myself for the
 rest of my life but thinking my god if I'd done this when I was 15 my god I would have had you
 know several more decades beforehand of freedom from all the issues that it had caused I completely
 agree I mean you know I'm not trying to eulogize any one doctor or any one clinic I'm not selling
 anything but that you know that basic health-based approach I think is where you should start well
 the podiatrists in our viewership thank you for this Michael Michael I can't thank you enough
 it's always a complete joy and a fascinating learning experience talking with you really
 appreciate you giving us so much time today bye-bye all right well now's the time when the
 program where we bring in the lead partners from New Harbor Financial to both react to Michael's
 commentary right there but also talk about what's going on in the markets right now and how they're
 reacting to it in real time I'm joined as usual by lead partners Michael Preston and John Loader
 guys thanks for joining me John let's start with you that was a big and intellectually gripping
 discussion there with Michael what were some of your key takeaways yeah hello Adam great to be
 with you and your viewers again I always enjoy Michael's perspective as you pointed out in your
 opening remarks with him he is a different part of the world than we are finding himself in
 Singapore so it's great to step outside of our our boundaries here in the US look our our job
 Mike and my job and our team job here for our clients is is every day on the street you know
 we're in the trenches and we're we're watching the daily and and short-term machinations of markets
 but we have to have a big picture frame of reference to put the cycles of things into
 context and and we know you know from history cycles do play out and they play out in very
 slow moving but important ways and I really appreciate perspectives of folks like like
 Michael's because it helps to put in the in the in into the context of the the cycles of things
 and of course we've talked at length and you haven't talked with your guests about the cycle
 that we might recently call the the the central bank cycle I know we're not on mainstream tv so
 I I get the luxury of repeating some choice words that Michael shared we have an era of frivolity
 and bullshit that has largely been stoked by just monetary policies that have really intervened in
 massive ways in the economy and especially the financial markets and here we are we're just
 just a little over an hour and a half away Adam from the federal reserve's announcement on
 interest rates and and their policy messaging and if there's one thing that the the markets over the
 last month and month and a half I guess have have proven is that markets are still utterly addicted
 to monetary policy moves if you look at what's what's happened in in the market expectations
 and we'll find out and again just an hour and a half as to what what if any policy decisions they
 make in terms of short-term interest rates today we don't and and the market doesn't expect they're
 going to do anything but stay put for today but the real key is their messaging about the potential
 for future rate changes and especially pivoting to starting to drop short-term rates and in fact
 the market has utterly gotten presumptive that the fed is not only going to start dropping rates but
 dropping them pretty meaningfully as early and the date expectation has been moved up by next summer
 I think there's over 90 expectation that the fed will have already started easing by then and as
 early as you know some mods of January but March and you know as we get in the spring I want to
 share a couple pictures because as addicted as markets are to to speculating on that one thing
 we know and and we can see it in the data is the market is very poor at at predicting what the fed
 is doing in fact you might even say the markets are stubbornly petulant and and spoiled here
 because the Jerome Powell has done a pretty good job we think at at messaging that look we're not
 done here we can't you know we can't let the fight for inflation you know to tame inflation we can't
 quit that fight too early and repeat the mistakes of the 70s we had our inflation report a couple
 days ago that came out okay in fact there were some things there like super core I'm not going
 to give them the details but came in a little stronger than expected but let me share a couple
 charts just to kind of you know show you what I'm talking about here so this is a chart that
 is courtesy of Jim Bianco I know you've had Jim on your program many times and and he's always
 a great source of perspective what what this chart is it basically shows the the market's guesses at
 the the path for future fed policy rates that's where all these kind of like squiggly lines are
 the dark black line is actually the the actual rate so you can see all these you know misses
 from that that dark line is essentially the the market's getting it wrong and and we think we'll
 find out again in less than a couple hours we think the market's gotten utterly too presumptive
 about the fed starting to cut rates at least at the degree and pace which which they the market
 expects and one reason for that is the financial conditions have have loosened dramatically this
 next chart again courtesy of Jim Bianco shows the Goldman Sachs financial conditions index
 and basically this is this is essentially an equivalency of fed rate reductions and you can
 see since since late October and this chart only goes through November 23rd I guess it's you know
 not even this month's date you can see there's a massive loosening in financial conditions you know
 interest rates drop stock market rose very very very you know considerably oil prices came down
 so that's effectively the equivalent of about a a full percentage point drop in in the in the fed's
 uh target rate now yeah just to be super clear the fed didn't drop its interest rates but but
 bond yields came down is what you're talking about right well this is the the you know what I'm trying
 to make is when Powell gave a pretty you know dovish commentary the last time around he did
 so and his peers did so by saying hey the market's doing the tightening for us so we don't have to
 tighten so much right and right after that happened the market effectively loosened financial
 conditions basically said oh yeah well you know we're not tightening anymore because at the time
 interest rates spiked you know the 10-year yield was was about five percent just five percent down
 right since that time essentially all those things that Powell pointed to as the market doing our
 tightening have reversed stock market has rallied considerably uh 10-year treasuries peaked at five
 came down to 4.2 area jigging you know oscillating around there point being is that the market went
 right to assuming the fed is gonna uh pivot and start to reduce and at the same time front-running
 that so I think there's a pretty good chance and we'll see um that that Powell comes out and say
 look you know uh we spoke about tight financial financial conditions but they've loosened so
 we're not going to be so quick as the market thinks to to lower rates and it's hard to interrupt
 I just want to underscore the point there that a lot of people just sort of think is the fed is all
 powerful and we just need to underscore for folks that it is a multi-factorial situation there the
 fed is quite powerful there's no doubt about that but it does not have all the power and the market
 can do a lot of things to stymie the fed's objective here as can the fiscal side of the
 house you know as in congress and the administration so I think one of the reasons why people have been
 so surprised by how things went in 2023 is because you you've had a lot of cross-currents in the
 different parties here right you've had Powell say we got to get things really tight to get inflation
 under control we've had the market at every point saying I don't believe you I'm getting ready to
 party more and you've had the fiscal side basically stamping on the economic accelerator while the
 fed's been trying to step on the economic brakes so it's much more complicated than just what the
 fed does is what I'm exactly right and I just wanted you know again the market is is cheerleading
 or expecting a pivot and you know I think our simple comment to that is one might better be
 careful about what one wishes for because as much as we've been trained to think that the fed you
 know coming to the rescue lowering interest rates is is a you know of salvation and a reason for
 markets to go higher that's not always the case and in fact if you look this is a chart that we
 put together shows the s&p 500 this goes back to the early 90s this is the fed reserve target rate
 lower bound and then every these red dots are basically dates on which the fed tightened or
 increased short-term rates and the green dots are dates where they they lowered rates and what you
 see the last two bubbles the the tech bubble and the housing bubble in both cases the the fed
 actually pivoting and dropping rates was you know certainly not a savior in fact that you might even
 say it was an accelerant to an over 50% sell-off here and over 60% sell-off here and there have
 been times yes when the fed has lowered rates and markets have rallied but if you look it's there's
 not a consistent pattern but typically when valuations are super super high like they are now
 it's it's been more often the case that markets actually decline when the fed is dropping rates
 you might even say the fed is dropping rates not as a proactive measure but as a reactionary
 you know you know hope to to stem the selling so we don't doubt that the fed might might stop
 you might start dropping rates but we think the premise of a soft landing and that being the
 reason is probably a bit off and we'll probably see them start to cut only when the market is in
 the economy they're starting to show some real cracks i really appreciate you bringing up that
 chart john i've shown variants of it before to warn people that when the fed plateaus after a
 rate hike regime history is pretty clear that you know i don't think you had recession shaded
 recessions in that chart but history is clear pretty clear that that's when recessions are
 most likely to happen right is once the fed has plateaued for a while well as far as we know we
 are plateauing we'll find out in an hour and a half you know what what their latest move is but
 it's highly expected to to stay they're not expected to change the fed funds rate today
 but you know that chart does a really good job of saying hey when the rate hikes end and then when
 the fed starts cutting that's when you want to be really nervous about the markets because much more
 often than not that's when the market starts plunging right and as you said john usually the
 reason the fed is starting to cut there is because it has realized oh my gosh we over tighten the
 economy slowing a lot more than we thought and we get to start scrambling here to try to start
 easing things so will history repeat this time we're going to find out but there's a real
 preponderance of historical evidence that we know how this script plays out mike i'm going to come
 over to you real quick john any other charts you wanted to show i don't i don't want to leave you
 hanging no that that about does it we um you know happy to turn turn over just want to make okay
 because i want to talk about the trades that you guys have been making at new harbor because i know
 you've been making several recently largely in response to the extremely low levels of volatility
 we're seeing in the market right now really quickly i just want to give a shout out to
 michael um so if you remember uh the conversation that i just had here with michael um you know he
 talked a lot about how you know steps that nations were going to take to become more resilient less
 dependent upon their trading partners we talked a lot about america and china literally just a
 couple of hours after i got off with michael um he sent me this uh an email with a link to this
 report that was just released by this the house select committee on the strategic competition
 between the united states and china it's called reset prevent build those are sort of its three
 tranches here and it essentially walks through exactly what michael was talking about right this
 this whole strategy that he said he's been focused on for you know a couple years now so this this
 house doc has three pillars the first is reset the terms of our economic relation with the prc
 uh relationship with the prc and it says here that yeah yeah you know there's they're taking
 advantage of a lot of our issues they're they're not abiding by the things we want them to abide
 by them um and so uh you know we basically have to do a trade reset with them uh pillar two is
 stem the flow of u.s capital and technology to them because that's fueling a lot of things that
 we don't like there and then pillar three invest in technical leadership and build collective
 economic resilience in concert with allies so this is very much the friendshoring and the reshoring
 that michael was talking about so i just wanted to sort of say that you know this was a real-time
 validation of his strategic thinking there um so again wanted to give credit where credit is due
 um mike let's come over to you now um what have you guys been doing recently in your your core
 portfolio there at new harbor thanks adam yeah i'd like to just do a recap of some recent changes
 we've made or are in the process of making right now it's a number of things happening in the
 market that we're noticing and um and we're living in pretty crazy times you know the the the last 10
 or 15 years have been unusual to say the the least in terms of how markets have changed and how
 monetary policy has been so extreme um i will go ahead and share a chart here and i'd like to start
 with volatility volatility uh or or you know it's basically a measure of risk and it's at all-time
 lows here or not all-time lows but multi-year lows take a look here at the daily chart of
 vix or volatility it touched 11.81 yesterday this is an utter collapse over the last uh you know
 few weeks last month we went from 22 to 11 in a very very fast fashion i'll go to the weekly chart
 you can see that we're at a two-year low go to a monthly chart and i'll just zoom in on this part
 i mean you can see that we're essentially at levels last seen back in 2019 and early 2020
 so you know that's before even the covid spike this this huge spike here is covered we haven't
 seen these levels since before covid so really this is a reflection of complacency in the market
 there's very little fear of of a big drop and ironically that's when you do have to start to
 be worried about that type of thing but what we've learned in the market is it can go a lot further
 than you think you know this could very well go even lower the market could have a blow off top
 in the next weeks and months and in fact what we're looking at in the market is starting to
 build evidence for that let's go to the s&p here briefly on the daily chart and just while you're
 pulling it up mike i will say that a number of the recent guests on this program uh felix zuloff being
 a very recent one um are seeing increasing indications that the market will it is more
 likely to power higher in the q1 well that's what it's looking like to us we don't like to make
 predictions and particularly to the bullish side when honestly we think the macro picture and the
 fundamentals are very bad very bearish but we have to admit that that certain things are lining up and
 telling us that the near-term direction is up if i want to just quickly go to the weekly chart on
 the s&p this is a weekly chart on the s&p and back when we had this big bar here this up week
 we became concerned of a breakout in the s&p and this was at the same time that our short-term
 indicators were reversing up we've got a number of things we look at market breadth participation
 sectors that are leading that type of thing and of course valuations are terrible but in the short
 term we we throw that out a little bit and we say okay what's the market actually doing here we
 became concerned um you know that we were going to get some kind of blow off top now i wouldn't call
 this a blow off top at least not yet but it has been you know we're on the seventh seventh straight
 week up week it's been a pretty relentless rise just shared with you volatility has collapsed to
 levels last seen in 2020 when this downtrend was broken we adjusted our hedges the first thing we
 did was adjusted our hedges we had in the money december puts up at 4 500 we sold those took a
 profit and we replaced them with puts that expired in january at 4 100. now the low low volatility
 that we just talked about has given us the opportunity to do some different things for
 instance we are rolling out our our hedges from january to march that low level of volatility
 means that options are cheaper than they were before because one of the largest components
 in the black shoal models which dictates option pricing is volatility so when volatility is low
 options are cheap so we have uh or in the process of rolling out our our our hedges for a 15
 notional position roughly in our accounts out to march 41 hundreds now that's a ways down there
 right it's a little over you know maybe 10 but the way that we look at it is this we've got around
 27 27 30 stock exposure not including gold mining stocks most of that is in emerging markets where
 we think valuations are compelling what we want to do is have some kind of crash protection
 on a good portion of our net stock exposure so we've increased a little bit a little at a time
 we're up to you know 27 and a half 30 and we're we actually maybe increase a little bit more
 in select sectors if we continue on this move higher but we are concerned about crash risk at
 any given time so the put options that we have in place for 15 essentially say after a 10 deductible
 on that on that stock allocation our put options protect us against further declines
 so the the tricky thing about a potential blow-off is you don't know when it's going
 to turn you don't know how how high it's going to go you have to try to ride it with part of it
 yet it could it could fail at any time and so the low volatility gave us the ability to adjust that
 one more thing that we are doing this week and in the process of doing is making some adjustments
 on our bond position let's take a look at tlt here's a daily chart of tlt it's been a really
 epic collapse we've talked a lot about it we got caught in it a little bit early uh we defrayed
 some of that downside with our put options but there's always a deductible well you know back
 at this time when we were getting dozens if not hundreds of calls from both clients and prospects
 and you know people that watch your show adam a lot of people wanted to talk there was a lot of
 capitulation here it doesn't mean it's the ultimate bottom but you can tell from being in this business
 for as long as we have when we get that kind of response that it's probably a near-term bottom
 and the 10-year yield went from about 5.2 down here on tlt to about 4.2 now so but this has
 been a really fast move we're back up between the 50 and 200 day moving averages this oversold
 condition has been released or relieved somewhat and now we have a huge you know fed decision here
 in about an hour and a half you know if the if the fed stays pretty firm and we think they will
 then this may have gotten a little bit ahead of itself we will see when that's what we're
 concerned about we ultimately think long bonds and tlt will go much higher maybe above 120 or
 130 on tlt particularly in a stock market meltdown but this move's been pretty fast and the in the
 risk of a a retracement is pretty high particularly because bullish positioning in bonds is very very
 lopsided there's a lot of bullish positioning even though there was somewhat of a capitulation
 back here money managers are pretty darn long you know maybe retail can capitulated but the numbers
 on on institutional managers is pretty long so lastly we're we're we're adjusting our hedges on
 on tlt uh establishing a call position a short call position up here at uh you know just over
 a hundred and using the proceeds from that sale to buy some puts down in this area in the high 80s so
 these are the purple lines we're doing that on all of the position not half and yeah we might get a
 further move higher but this is not going to be a v recovery probably it's it's going to be a process
 of ups and downs if i were to go to the last thing i'll show you here the weekly chart you know last
 time we had a big down move we moved sideways for a while so you know whether this moves sideways
 here or goes a little higher than move sideways it's probably not going to be a v-shaped move and
 you can see that pretty well here on the monthly chart you know a bounce here's like eight months
 sideways and so it's not likely that within two three four months we're going to go right back to
 110 it's probably going to be more sideways so i will uh i'll pause there all right well thanks
 so much for walking through that mike and it does a great job of showing people um when how you guys
 think and are reacting to market conditions but because you guys are so skilled at using options
 not as a speculative tool but really as a protectionary instrument um i think it's super
 valuable how you explain to people how you're doing that so on tlt um you guys are remaining
 in the position right you're just putting some again some sort of insurance around it but you
 are remaining in it because over the course of the next year plus you think uh bond treasury bonds
 prices will grind higher may chop around for a good bit like you said mike but the the long-term
 trajectory will be up i i believe so i know you've had a number of guests on recently i believe felix
 zuloft the other day said he thought maybe we would drop to 3.6 or 3.7 on the 10-year and then
 go back above five again and then maybe lower later um we think you know we think that yields
 will go lower than that over time you know i don't want to we don't want to hold bonds for 10 years or
 20 years but we do want to hold them for maybe two years because we see the 10-year going down perhaps
 into the twos on the yield if we get a real big stock market drop like we think we will at some
 point so but we just don't think it's going to be a straight line so tlt as i said a minute ago
 probably will go back into the mid-100s 120 to 150 range something like that if that happens if
 we drop back into the twos but we're probably going to have a retest of the other lows on price
 and on the highs on yields and i think i think felix basically said that the other day on your
 program and we tend to agree with that that we'll probably see five plus again on a retest so we want
 to stay in the position let's put it this way we want to stay in the position to ultimately achieve
 that higher return it could take a year and the best way we know to stay in the position to have
 your cake and eat it too is to continue to adjust the parameters on our option hedges basically we
 put guard rails on the position so that you limit your downside yeah that's right all right excellent
 well guys thanks so much just one last thing i want to note for folks and i want to thank you
 guys for coming on too it's been a little bit of a chaotic week in terms of in terms of planning
 out the content here we had a few curveballs we had to had to react to so i appreciate you guys
 coming on now to film this reaction to michael as you guys said this is going to air over the
 weekend so folks are likely watching this they're watching it the day it goes out it's already
 sunday so the world will know the results of the the fomc announcement and you know whatever pal
 says in his press release which is coming up now in about an hour i just want to flag for folks
 that later on today the day that i'm actually recording this i will be doing a live q and a with
 fed watcher axel murk where he'll be interpreting for us what he took away from the fed minutes and
 and whatever pal has to say and we'll be taking live q and a from the audience this is going to
 be for the premium subscribers to my sub stack this is the first time i've done anything like
 this my sub stack's still relatively new as most folks know but i'm always trying to think of ways
 in which i can increase the value of a premium subscription so the my premium subscribers will
 be able to participate in that live discussion with axel and they'll be able to ask any questions
 of actual they want to the replay of that video is then going to release the next day to everybody
 to the world so if you're watching this on sunday that's already on this channel and so if you want
 to hear what axel had to say about pal's commentary and his guidance you can go watch that video after
 this one but i just want to note for folks that you know we continue to try to evolve that sub
 stack channel two things that are worth noting one is that there is going to be a price increase you
 know i just launched the channel about a month ago i've been publishing my adams notes to it
 which there is a cost to now that i'm beginning to get a better sense of the business i need to
 bump up the cost a little bit it was really cheap it was eight bucks a month it's still going to be
 very cheap it's going to be 15 bucks a month but if you are a current premium subscriber do not
 worry everybody who's currently subscribed is going to stay at that eight dollar a month or
 80 bucks a year price for as long as you remain subscribed so you'll be grandfathered into that
 you don't have to worry about your price going up the price increase i'm not going to do until
 january 1st so if you are a current subscriber a free subscriber to the sub stack and thinking
 about becoming a premium one if you decide you want to act before january 1st so you can lock in
 the current price and get grandfathered in on that as well and if you haven't subscribed at all yet
 just subscribe now for free doesn't cost you anything to become a free subscriber you'll get
 you know all the content that i share multiple days a week through that sub stack and whenever
 i do do something new like this axle event for premium subscribers i do let the whole
 community know so if you decide hey this is the thing i want to participate in you can subscribe
 at that moment and jump on in all right enough details about that if you've enjoyed this
 conversation with michael every would like to have him come back on the channel please vote
 your support for that by hitting the like button then clicking on the red subscribe button below
 as well as that little bell icon right next to it john and mike guys thanks so much for joining me
 for another week everybody else if you want to watch that fed reaction video with axel like i
 said it's it's now available i'll put up a link to it right here gents mike and john we'll see you
 next week to see you know get your guys's thoughts on on pal's commentary here everybody else thanks
 so much for watching goodbye for now adam thank you everybody goodbye adam thank you we'll see you
 soon you
